Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Good afternoon, or good morning. wherever you are. Welcome to another seminar of topics in computer engineering say mentioned we are towards the end of the semester and as a advertisement that the next semester will have again. This is seminar series and the applications are open and fully remote participation. It's full in English another Edition that we will have. >> Filip De Turck: it >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: in the second semester. And today we have a guest lecture. I like to believe comes Oak against lecture. by Philip The Turk and as usual Filipino spend time in introducing the bios of our speakers because there are large Rich easily found online. And but if you want to say a some words about yourself more than and then for the attendees prepare your questions we have around 15 minutes. towards the end for for interactive Filip and a topic that I say. I was telling you we are investing. time students research. What is a holographic type Communications how to do research that could be meaningful for for this area. So looking forward to to learn more about what you are doing what you see that our communities doing and >> Filip De Turck: you >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: let's see if we can collaborate. and do some joint research, okay. Thanks, baby. the floor >> Filip De Turck: Okay. Thank you. Thank you Christian. and dear students. Welcome to this to this lecture. It's my pleasure to give this lecture of about 40 minutes. and then of course, I will be happy to interact with you and answer questions and maybe I will also ask questions to you maybe. So maybe just as a as a brief introduction to myself, so I'm based in Kent University and in Belgium, so here you see the partial map of Europe as you can see. Hopefully you can see the the pointer here. Yes, and Belgium is in yellow here. So we are close to England France Germany the Netherlands, Luxembourg. And I'm also part of iMac iMac is a research institutes in Flanders similar to front over and in Germany. And my research group is called the idealab research Group, which stands for internet's data. internet technology and data science lab We have many experts in our research group. I will also collaborate a lot with industry Partners. So that's really something that we put focus on and I know Christian is also a person well now researcher. global scale who also likes to work with with industry partners And the list with industry Partners here is not exhaustive. So it's just some examples of Industry partners that we that we work at. My main expertise is on network softwareization network automation Service delivery. I was also editor-in-chief overnight triplet transactions journals so Network and service management so feel free in your future careers. to submit to this journal or maybe during your Masters already and I was also a chair of the i3pld technical committee on network operations and management. and so this IEEE technical committee is one of the 28 technical committees. insights com communication Society. So here you see the entire list of technical committees and I highlighted the network operations and management technical committee and this technical committees are very interesting also for young researchers if you find topic interesting and you want to start building a network so getting to know people that work on a topic have personal conversations with people organize workshops special issues. and so on then these technical committees are very good starting point so you can contact Your published online you can contact them get in touch with them and then this is always a very good acceleration. to improve an extent your personal Network. So this is a small recommendation. So I mentioned softwareized Networks. so this means that we bring software to the network. So not only Hardware but also software and most important element is that we bring virtualization Concepts to the network. And this is similar to cloud computing. So I assume most of you if not all. Or familiar with cloud computing. So if I would ask you what is the main driver? For cloud computing to be successful. so it was launched about 20 years ago, and then the main driver to be successful. Was the availability of virtual machines so that on a physical computer physical machine you can start several virtual machines and you can start serving multiple users at the same time by making use of these multiple virtual machines. And the same reason is that if we can virtualize networks so that we own a single physical Network. We can run multiple virtual networks Then we can also start serving multiple customers providing service guarantees to all of them. thanks to this Concepts and this is really a game changer and the Technology. also an industry. So let me explain you very briefly Maybe you're already familiar, but I will explain it briefly. So even if you're not already familiar. it will be interesting to to learn. what is Network function virtualization because I will come back to this once I explained Holograms and volumetric media delivery then I will also Explain how virtual Network functions can be of interest so if we consider a home environments then there are multiple devices and in your home and typically there is a home Gateway. And on the home K3, we have different functionality. There is the HTTP server. There is an entity router firewall also quality of experience monitoring software for instance. if we have TV streams or video streams that we display on screens inside your home then we also monitor the quality of experience inside the home Gateway. And then typical Auto device is a setup box. so stb. Which contains? for a digital TV storage so that you can record movies and TV programs. Middleware that allows you to interact through remote control. And to start recording stop recording play a certain TV program. and so on for unless we need to middleware on the setup box. And also we have a streaming client. So this is the software that starts streaming the files and make sure that we can see the videos on the screen. so if you look at these functionalities on the home Gateway and Books, these are typically called Network functions. And when they are executed on these boxes Then they are executed inside your homes. but if we virtualize them so virtualized Network functions vnfs then They will be. executed not in your home, but in a remote Data Center. and the data center can be close by but can also be far away and another country, but then we software rise this this functions and and they run as software components inside remote Data Center. And this is a very important Evolution because then we don't need these devices in your home. You just need to connect the different screens. to the network sockets so that they have internet connectivity, but but all the other functions that are listed here. They are no longer executed inside your home. and there are many advantages first from point of view of a network operator. Because we can maximize resource utilization. and also optimize energy usage because if all the functions they run on separate devices in each home. They need to run permanently. but if if they are in a data center then we can run many of them on on the same machine. making use of virtual machines or containers inside the data center. and also in terms of Updates, this is a very important Advantage when we update Network functions, then we can very fast and easy deploy them. And and configure them. and it's much easier than changing software on a dedicated device at home in a data center. We can overnight quickly and efficiently updates Network functions. And also for the service provider there are many advantages. Which are listed here. so we can dynamically scale Network and Computing and storage resources. based on on service requirements. so we can make use of elasticity properties of cloud computing. and we have a reduced time to market for services. So if we have a new service. We can quickly introduce it and customers can make use it very fast because they don't need to buy the equipment. They don't need to connect manually. and it can be done automatically. Thanks to the software in the data centers. Okay, so this was a very important topic that I wanted to introduce first. And the second topic before we will delve into Holograms and volumetric meter delivery as the topic of adaptive Service delivery that I want to share with you first because it's important to understand this basic concept. is that if we have a video file That we want to convey over the network and show on the screen. Then in case of adaptive service delivery. We will. The the file into small chunks so each chunk for instance of 4 to 10 seconds. and footage Small Chunk we will provide. a low quality version a medium quality version and also a high quality version. So This is what you see with the different numbers here. the low quality version corresponds to number one medium quality number two and high quality number three. Okay, and the higher the quality the higher the bitrates that you need need over the network. I know the important element is that at a client sites? So here you see the client for instance who watch your movie on the smartphone or a tablet. and At this device at a client device we will make an estimation of the available bandwidth. and Okay good an estimation of the available bandwidth. And there is an algorithm here that calculates which video quality level can be transported efficiently over the network. So based on the estimation of the of the video quality as you can As you can see here on the screen Here's the estimation of the available bandwidths and then at the client side a decision is made. no we will. requests low quality one at this moment. We have a high bandwidth available Then we will request a higher bandwidth. And here we have a drop so then we will request medium quality. and so on. So this is the algorithm that YouTube is using so I believe this talk is also streams through YouTube. So the same algorithm is being used. and this lecture is delivered over the network Okay, we will use it for holographic type Communications. Okay. So next let's also now have a look at volumetric media. So I interviewed two important Concepts. I know I will focus on volumetric media and volumetric media delivery. so volumetric media delivery corresponds to the a technique that captures three-dimensional space and so we Are very used to two-dimensional video? in the past. So for instance here is a person. playing two-dimensional game and in 360 degree. video we are much more immersed into the situation. So there is a deep absorption and to the environment and into the activity. So for instance, this is for Formula 1 racing game. And you can pretend to be Max verstappen and you also see. with the virtual reality goggles and you see you have the same citation as if you wear in the race car. similar to maxford stopper. If you look at volumetric media. This is a technique to capture three-dimensional space. So then we also where Vargas and then objects can be displayed and we can look at your objects and it is as if your objects or really there and for instance we can then play a game and objects or shown. to us. And this is a technology like a virtual reality or Entituality and it really expected to play a key role in the future also from economical and societal point of view. so if you look at volumetric media delivery in the traditional 3D images there are two static views. So there is a view for the left eye and a view for the right eye and these need to be synchronized. But if we focus on Holograms then we add parallax. and Parallax as you as you can see here is the upper end apparent displacement of an object base. on a change in the observer's point of view. So if the Observer changes the point of view, then you have the feeling that you can look around the objects. So next to the object or on top of the object or even underneath your objects, so you create multiple views and these are the different movements. That you can make so if you make movements in these directions. And these are called Six Degrees of freedom. Then you have a different view of the of the objects. And for instance if you make use of Google meet or Zoom, then typically we have two. dimensions and if we make use of fully metric media, then we have six degrees of freedom and there are many important use cases for this. One of them is the holographic collaboration and conferencing we also call this daily presence because a person who is at a remote location. is then as a hologram displayed close to you and it's as if the person is close to you and you can interact with a person but in reality the person can be far away. And second important use case is daily surgery or in healthcare remote patient monitoring. Where you can also display in for instance in case of an operation a surgery. important. can also show the important parts and then surgeons can work together. or can monitor patients that are remotely And also very importantly there's use case of industrial monitoring and management. so industry for those here or even 5.0. where you can remotely inspect objects that are produced and a factory for instance. And instead of inspecting them locally, you can inspect them remotely and then you can decide which of the products are meeting the requirements. This can be. kept and which objects are not meeting. So thanks to this Holograms all these use cases or or possible and there are many more use cases and I I will explain some of them in the next Pages as well. So it's important to realize that the Holograms are not science fiction anymore for instance. There is a German circus. that's uses Holograms. instead of animals for instance a hologram of elephant here. There's also contributes to the Animal Welfare. and there's also the famous hologram of princess Leila and the Star Wars episode. and these two examples are local applications. So they are not transported over over the network. and if we would like to transport Holograms over the network then the bandwidth requirements are really very high. So in the order of gigabits per second. So then we really need compression to be able to transport all this data over the network. and of course as we are computer science Engineers these bandwidth requirements and also delay requirements or very interesting to us. And for instance, let's have a look at which bandwidth requirements do we need? for transporting video over the network? so if you have high definition television for instance as you can see here. For instance up to five megabits per second then if we have a higher quality and six 360 degree video corresponding to to 4K then up to 25 megabits per second and even 16k. Times 20 so 500 megabits per second. and if we then look at the Holograms then there are two important Technologies. There is the point clouds technology and also the Light Fields technology. so an endpoint clouds Let me explain it with the famous picture here. So this is the Stanford bunny. And if you want to represent this object through to a point clouds as the name suggests, then we will consider all possible points of the the objects. And three-dimensional space. so we will determine for each point on the surface and XY that's coordinates as you can see here for this point, and we will also add color information. So rats green blue information RGB value so six data points for each point and if we then have this information for all different points Then we we create a point cloud. objects and if if we transfer this information over the network, then we can create this Parallax effect. So then we can look next to the objects on top of the object underneath the objects and large. and the size of the object So based on this point where information We can really display it as as a hologram. and important optimization because if you have this point class the consume a lot of bandwidths. you really need a lot of data points. a lot of information and if you make use of meshes Then we will construct. triangles. So small triangles on top of the service and then we also keep the information about the location of the of the triangles together with the color information inside the triangle and then we can have small triangles and then we have a high quality representation. And if we have bigger rectangles or bigger triangles then we have a lower quality estimation of the of the object. So by changing the size of the of the triangles we can adapt the amount of data that we need and also the quality of experience. That corresponds to the objects. So now I explained the point clouds to you and so when we make use of this technology that we will focus on the object itself for instance. Here's a person's skiing down a mountain and then making a point cloud of this person is only the person itself. not the environment. But if you also need the environments so the mountains behind the person then we need image-based techniques. So it's a light Fields technique and then this is more computationally and intensive there. We have to reconstruct a planoptic function, which is a five-dimensional function representing the intensity of Lights. observed from every position and direction in the three-dimensional space. based on a set of example images so then we we can based on this plan of take function We can generate realistic images by indexing the appropriate light rays and then we can construct. and make use of Parallax to really as a hologram. Display the information. but an important observation that you you probably already made is that if you look at the required bandwidths For light Fields technology. They are much higher. Than for Point clouds. So this is the main reason why we typically use Point clouds. If we know give demonstrations with Holograms volumetric media, we typically use Point clouds, but I expect in the future because we can also model the environment and not only the objects in the future. light Fields technologies will be very important. So I also want to take this opportunity to introduce a European projects to you, which is the spirit projects. It started in 22, and it will run until the end of next year. here you see the different partners in the Consortium. So we have deutschutil Telecom on board. Also Erickson as an equipment provider. I know Christian has a very good relationship with Erickson. And also universities and research institutes are involved and iMac listed here. This is my affiliation and iMac is leading this European project. And the aim of spirits. as listed here is to build a scalable platform for Innovations. on real-time immersive telepresence. So the telepresence that I explained through Holograms that are shown close to you. And to allow for conference use cases, this is really the aim of the project to build demonstrators and Innovations on top of this. So it's important to understand that in order to be able. to provide daily presence through Holograms really as a service then we need Innovations on different levels. So we need Innovations at Network network layer. on the transport layer so different transport protocols. I assume you are familiar with some of them. and also at the application content and security layer. There is a need for several Innovations, and these are covered insights the spirit project with these partners. And let me show you a main diagram of the of the spirit project and here I make use of the virtual Network functions that I introduced in the beginning. So I explained you this is an important concepts for softwareized networks, and we also make use of them. These are the key elements and the European project Spirits where we have a lot of virtual Network functions. to enable volumetric media delivery over Networks. so we have virtual Network functions for compressing compression and encoding of the streams then also virtual Network function for transport buffering merging and synchronization of streams also for view prediction. So to predict very user will most likely view so that we can provide highest quality. there For decoding and also then for rendering and monitoring of quality of experience. So we have different virtual Network functions and then we have to deploy them on the available Network infrastructure and there is a edge Computing. So we have data centers close to the end users and if we need low latency then we should deploy some of these virtual Network functions. very close to the to the end users and others we can deploy inside data centers in A cloud computing environment. So it's important that we make a right decision where to deploy this vnfs in order to guarantee High throughput and low latency to the to the end users. and so we build a demonstrator where we have Android Telecom, which is based in Berlin and Germany and then University of Surrey is based in London. We build a demonstrator. So to demonstrate telepresence with people presence in Berlin and in London and to show Holograms of each other and interact with each other as if everyone is local and close to each other. and the the spirit use cases that I want to show you. or List it here and this corresponds to typical use cases when we talk about holographic type Communications. So we have the real time human to human interactions. So holographic conversations. when you want to have a conversation with the person that that's not locally there but at remote location. And also importantly real-time human machine interactions. Where we interact basically with for instance mobile robots autonomous mobile robots, and there are two options either. These are human initiated. So then a human requests and mobile robots. to take up a task for instance to supervise Factory plans. For instance. So you give the robots a specific task and then the robot takes care of this this task can also be machine initiated. This means that the mobile robots They are autonomous and they will alert humans when they observe something or they want to solve a contextual problem and they want to have guidance then they they contacts humans. They're also open calls in the Spanish projects. I just mentioned this very briefly. So other parties. Research institutes or companies they can also make use of the spirit platform and demonstrate their applications and the applications. that are covered and I will just go over this briefly is in the healthcare domain retail domain education training entertainments, manufacturing. so industry for those zero. 5.0 and also in the tourism domain so you see many targets application domains. So there is really a lot of application potential of holographic type Communications. okay, and a very important question that we should have in mind and that you typically also ask yourself when you consider the high bandwidth requirements. These are really huge and then the main question is That you ask yourself. Can the current infrastructure deal with this volumetric media delivery. And for this we did many experiments in our lab So based on point cloud scenes for instance of the objects that you see here. friends. If you have four of these objects that we require close to 20 gigabits per second. And then we did experiments. in overlap. where we make use of adaptive streaming. So the Adaptive streaming that I explained you in the beginning this one this technique we used for transporting the Holograms through Point Cloud scenes over the network and now we extend the the basic technique by considering different objects. So as you can see here, we consider four different objects and for each object. We have a low quality version. a medium quality version and then also a high quality version. And at the client sites, this is no. at the Googles that the user is wearing. There. We make a decision. based on the available bandwidths and for each of the different objects we make a decision. which quality levels can can fit. and for instance here as you can see of the available bandwidth is slow then we can also only use for the four objects the lower quality if we have more bandwidth available then typically we will select the objects where the user is watching at. So where users being attention to this? We will give the highest quality. And the others can have a lower quality and so on. so we can dynamically change the quality levels based on the And it's important if you do research on Holograms. holographic type communication as Christian mentioned in the beginning. It's important to not only focus on objective quality. measurements, but also do subjective studies so involve users. um and interact with Holograms and then also let them give their personal opinion on the quality levels. And so we did experiments and and overlap. You see the the settings here with four point clouds and different video sequences and different configurations of available bandwidths. and efficiency of the viewpoints prediction within total 30 participants of the subjective study and here you see a typical output. So the mean opinion score and as the The output that user's GIF. So if they really like the quality then they give five on five typically five stars and this corresponds to to 100 if they only give one star one on five. This is a score of of 20. So this is the cumulative distribution function that that you see here and depending on the scenario. So in the low bandwidth scenario medium bandwidth high bandwidth and even unlimited bandwidth scenario you see the mean opinions course of the users and as you can clearly see from this observation, the mean opinion scores or less than we expected. So we expected and then high bandwidth scenario or even unlimited bandwidth scenario much higher mean opinion scores. So it's it really means that there is something else that we should pay attention to because the mean opinion scores are lower than than we expected and the main reason is that the techniques that we use to the Adaptive streaming does not cater to the latency requirements. so we not only needs Innovations at the application layer as as in the example that I gave it adaptive streaming. This is basically an application layer optimization, but we also need Network layer optimizations and also across layer based end-to-end architecture for volumetric media delivery. And this is the platform that I want to introduce to you. So if you want to achieve immersive. so so that we can be deeply absorbs and into the contents. volumetric media delivery that we really need a cross layer approach. And here you see the the different layers, so we we have a holographic end user one and a holographic and user 2 The communicate with each other so here you see the the cameras that record a person and then here hologram is displayed. and so we need optimizations at the application layer. So we call these end-user optimization. So at the client side or the server side. also optimizations over the top and transport optimizations and then also optimizations with respects to network architecture. So let me briefly go over these three layers. I will keep it briefs because I want to meet the time requirements. and the latency requirements that Christian gave me. So in terms of end-user optimizations there are optimizations possible at the client sites. And at the server site so at the client sites, there are different feeds. as you can imagine visual feed or your feet and and tactile feeds. And we can make use of few Port prediction. This is a client side optimization. So we try to capture where the users are most likely watching. This is the viewport that we try to predict. We also need to synchronize the feeds and also importantly and this is a topic that in my opinion will be very important for the next years and research as a cyber sickness assessments. Because this is a feeling that users sometimes gets when they make use of. virtual reality applications. They can get Cyber sick because the expectant objects to be at a certain location at a certain time and if there's not a case then they can feel unwell, so it's important that we can predict and and this so that it's it's convenience for users to make use of holographic type Communications. at the server side we can also make use of tiles instead of entire objects. to divide them in different tiles and then the tiles can again have different quality levels. So then we have more freedom to decide which quality levels so that we can adapt to the available bandwidth. and then in terms of the over the top and transports optimizations. There it's important that we make use of of the right platform and Technologies. So if you make use of HTTP adaptive streaming the technique that I explained you then typically we focus on the quality optimization. We optimize for the best possible quality and then if you use other techniques like RTP UDP streaming or making use of the web RTC together with quick platform Then we really focus on latency optimization. and here you see the pro and cons of the difference techniques and for holographic type communication we in fact need the best of both Worlds. So we need a combination of this and that there are different techniques that are there that we can use for combining advantages of different transport layer protocols intelligent buffering techniques and also smarter return transmission techniques HTTP push that comes with HTTP 3.0 for instance. that allows us to obtain lower latencies. and then at a transport layer and control layer Innovations, we also have the virtual. Reliable quick also called PR quick. so quick as a transport protocol by my Google and these are extensions that investigated and recently published So here we make use of partially reliable quick where some of the tiles we can make them reliable because here most likely the user will watch this is a personal server, So most likely you will watch the person and serve words and not so much the environment. so then we can give These higher quality make them reliable and the delivery and the others can be unreliable. so they can be displayed in a lower quality. And then finally is Need for Innovation on novel Network architectures. and here optimizations with virtual Network functions that I explained in the beginning. So the service function chain optimizations or really important. so the efficient placements of these virtual Network functions and making sure that we meet the requirements in terms of latency and and throughputs. This is really an important. technology. So the main aim is that we can very conveniently very comfortably make use of holographic type Communications and communicate with people as if they were close to us. And in my team we designed a platform for this and we call this as our fog. So it's based on segment routing and also the concept of four computing. and we make use of microservices and the microservices then the corresponds to the virtual Network functions, and we optimally place them also by following the kubernetes architecture model. Basing them efficiently and sidebots inside containers. to be able to make sure that the content delivery. very efficient a very convenient to the to the end and users. So here you just see an example of VR user one VR user 2. that communicates with each other and in order to enable this we need several virtual Network functions that are shown here for scene merging quality scaling movement prediction and so on and then we decides which service will put in which which port and then where we will deploy the deploy it so and we have different options. This is a plot environment. This is an edge environment and this is a folk environment. This is a Raspberry Pi environment and then we decide where to deploy. these virtual Network functions and then we can host the service and really enable the holographic type communication between the the two users. So let me know go to the conclusions Christian. so there are many open challenges and and topics and I'm happy to learn that also Christian. is interested in holographic type Communications. So I look forward to a collaborations. believe there's a need for further research in terms of network optimizations So I lists several topics here. also in terms of predictive orchestration and distributed networking will also be very important also in 10-based networking will be important and also application optimizations that I explained. different techniques that I explained need to be further investigated optimized. And in my opinion, this is really a challenge that we have to tackle with a lot of researchers put an industry wooden and Academia. and then I believe we will have or we will be able to make progress and to obtain very interesting results for the future from an economical point of view. But also from a societal point of view as I explained. So it is also important to me. that we can also make some progress from a societal point of view. so with this Christian I would like to pass the floor back to you. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thank you. >> Filip De Turck: Thank you. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thank you Filip. very very interesting stuff And I was browsing through the spirit here deliverables looking into the the what you call the platform. I was a looking for some GitHub repositors where that students could start playing with with these volumetric media Concepts and that was one of the challenges that in our group where we >> Filip De Turck: if >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: encountered like the barrier to entry of entry into this research because you don't have these cameras the end devices. so easily, what's up, high? How do you see the how to start and what open source components to put together Easter? Do you share my my feeling that it's not so easy right now to start or there's some Is there some light? yes, we're going to see more open data more open source to facilit. >> Filip De Turck: Yes. Yes. Yeah, excellent. Excellent question. So in my opinion, I I really hope to see a significant increase in the amount of Open Source software and definitely from from my team for instance the SR folk platform that I mentioned we made this open source, so it's mentioned in papers on this as it was published for instance and cnsm. um previous editions of cnsm conference and there we also have the hitup links to it. So I I definitely see a trend in research and Publications that a lot of researchers also are moving towards this direction. and also what you mentioned Christian in terms of barrier in terms of equipments. that you need so cameras and and so on. this is indeed true, but but even with with a single or with two cameras you can already do an interesting experiments. Um, and once a point cloud is created. So the first step in my opinion is always you have to create a point cloud. And when this is created you can publish it or you can share with all the researchers and then you can start doing your research and then you don't need a camera anymore because you have the point clouds that captures everything and then you can do the calculations. which oneization of it. so if we share point class and my team, we have Point clouds that we make a publicly available. So based on this you can do a lot of interesting research even if you don't have the camera or the expensive goggles. so it's of course good to have a few of these goggles. So that students researchers can have a feeling. And get acquainted to the to the environment holographic environment. but there is no need to have 20 or 25 of them. even made a limited number of of Google's. And cameras you can already do very interesting stuff in my opinion. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Nice nice. >> Filip De Turck: look >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Yeah, I guess what some of my students have already used your point cloud videos. I can see. Alan is putting here a question. I'm very technical one or over the YouTube chat. He's asking about the partially reliable quick. >> Filip De Turck: Yes. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: if you I tracking on mounted head devices as Amanda Tory feature. >> Filip De Turck: Yeah, okay. Okay. Yeah. that that that's a good question did so your student has as clearly have a detailed look at the paper here. So the paper was published and I typically access I think a few months ago. And and there we indeed that the experiments where we included. viewport prediction and also also eye tracking and the main goal of the eye tracking was to make a prediction where the user is as watching. so Then we can provide a highest quality levels. where the user is watching and then the background surroundings can have lower quality version. but if you have very accurate viewport prediction, then you don't need to the the eye tracking. So eye tracking is mainly used if used is not moving a lot like myself now. I'm not moving a lot. So I I only make very few movements and then I tracking is useful But another applications then users are moving much more and then you have more data to make a prediction. where so if user is moving towards something then most likely during the next second or two seconds. The user will also move following the trend line. So if if you have trend lines available, then you don't need so much eye tracking. but for more Statics scenarios like myself today here then eye tracking is more useful if you want to optimize. Quality level, of course if you have sufficient bandwidth available. then you don't need it because then you can provide fairly good quality at all time, and you don't need to make a distinction. between high and lower quality. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Okay. >> Filip De Turck: I I hope this answers to some extent the question of your students. Thank you. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thanks Filip. And so I learned I was last week close by I could to get but I was in advert in ucnc and I learned there is negative latency. That's a I hadn't learned this term. It's about prediction. So if you can predict the the next frame or the the next packet that will arrive you have you achieve negative latency just thinking about blowing my my mind because you mentioned prediction prediction a couple of >> Filip De Turck: Here. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: I guess then. AI ml artificial intelligence machine learning are are also at the heart of many of these topics that you have put here as research as a tool to solve many of them. Do you? You can you mention some AI or a mail to the church so many hates to see us that one to use. ml AI Beyond. Digging and movements. What else do you see applications for this? >> Filip De Turck: Yeah, okay, okay. very good question. Very good. So in in the past this machine learning artificial intelligence was typically used to predict movements of users. but also in terms of cyber security. or excuse me Cyber sickness detection and possibly prevention. There will also use machine learning techniques based on a lot of data that we that we acquire and also physiological data from users. So also heart rate maybe stress levels blood pressure. and and so on so physiological data That this generates a lot of data captured from a user's body. of course if they are willing to to participate to such a study and then based on this data you can also predict. when a user might feel unwell and experience cyber sickness and so on so I believe in that region there will also be a lot of application of AI and machine learning. and also as I explained so that the placement of virtual Network functions so the the software modules that has to be started in the edge or in a cloud environment and this has to be in a very Dynamic way and there we also make use of AI machine learning. To determine where we should put the components when we should move it to another location. and so on because this is something we cannot do manually. It's important. It's impossible to make a especially when it's very Dynamic and we have hundreds of thousands of simultaneous holographic type communication users. Then there's something where we will need ai-based network service management techniques. to make sure that all these software components run properly have sufficient bandwidths latency is not too high and so on so there definitely I see use of machine learning and very large scale environments. And they're my team is also focusing on edge clouds optimizations making use of machine learning techniques. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Nice, and I guess there are also opportunities for Hardware acceleration right for for smart, needs fpgas this BFF. >> Filip De Turck: now >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: the probably the the performance the latency. that's also another subject right as well. >> Filip De Turck: Yes. yes. It is. Definitely there's definitely another subject. then Hardware acceleration can be beneficial and and in the class. so in the data center so that you have a higher throughput. there and even lower latency. for instance if you have an encoding or decoding then with Hardware acceleration that the decoding or encoding time is reduced. a significantly But but you still have to take into account the latency of the of the network and careful placements of the still be important. But but definitely Hardware acceleration. also for security, this is topic that I didn't cover but security is also a topic in spirit project and there also Hardware acceleration is also considered To make sure that the security protocols can be run properly. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Good, very interesting stuff. I like the connection the possibility of this physical world and to understand the quality of experience very user-centric where the right >> Filip De Turck: Nope. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: friend to I can imagine different types of persons of users will really evaluate their experience. So, I mean, it looks to me like it's a very hard problem. It's quite of experience. They'll be active metrics as far as I understood are not fully sufficient, right to >> Filip De Turck: Yeah, yeah. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: us. Yes, and then the users may change. a lot their their scores. What what is you the lesson learned around the qoe that you could highlight or what is the conversate of the art or what? What are less understood you of course, you put it here to increase queue, but What would you? highlight on this qie objectives objective studies >> Filip De Turck: Yeah, this is indeed a very very important area and there is also a lot of standardization and efforts by the impact. consortia. So the also focus on standardization of objective metrics techniques for subjective evaluations to standardize. So that they can serve as a kind of a benchmark. so that if companies say quality of experience is this High and other company has an older number so that we can compare them. so there is lots of efforts not only a research but also in these standardization bodies. And it also focus on the holographic type Communications already since not for so long already, but Two years or something. They did really start focusing on this and on query models for holographic type Communications. So this is an important topic to keep up with the standardization efforts and and so on and then my Approach is typically that's I start with an objective evaluation. Where where I measure the received qualities the obtained latency so things that you can really measure and then from this I try to derive whether there was a decent. delivery of the contents and try to put it in a percentage. And then next to this then. I I do subjective evaluations. To see if the objective evaluation is indeed, correct? And then there is really a feedback loop. Because based on subjective experiments. Sometimes they're new elements that you should take into account also when you do the objective evaluation. That user is pointing to something King and that is really devastating for for the quality and then you should take this into accounts. and and so it's really iterative approach in my opinion. and my goal is always to find the best objective metrics because if you want to make the system autonomous autonomous system. then Then it's very hard to do this with a subjective evaluations. so in my opinion subjective evaluations are Or key to improve the objective. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: right >> Filip De Turck: evaluations >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: and the subjective other sufficiently were standardized and documented or do you need to find your own methods the methodology? >> Filip De Turck: Well, well, yeah, there are a few conferences for instance. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Yes. >> Filip De Turck: There is the coolmex conference. And so it takes place next week in Sweden and this is typical community that publishes a lot of papers on this. And they have some guidelines for instance. You need at least 25 participants. And you need to ask them at least 10 different questions. and so on so they have some some typical approaches and they're published papers and I typically follow these this guidelines and I sometimes also publish in this Comics conference for instance last year. 23, it was organizing and I I organized together with my colleagues, of course. We organized comics in, Kansas. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Nice nice will have a closer look at this and okay it really it's time. We need to to the to get the the timing right the students now have other classes. It was great talking to you about this very exciting topic as I mentioned in the smartness resource center that we have still nine years more to go early with the whole family. >> Filip De Turck: Oh. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: with Elixir and the best Sao Paulo funding agency. We are happy. We have a track on HTC on holographic type Communications and your group. >> Filip De Turck: I see. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: is a reference. The spirit project is also one of the inspiring ones that we are following and reading the deliverables looking for the open source code and data and >> Filip De Turck: Yes. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: let's let's catch up on the possibilities of collaboration of A student that exchanges that we have also good funding to to send you our PhD students. and stay and enjoy beautiful Belgium. Okay. Thanks you. Thank you. >> Filip De Turck: Okay. Thank you Christian for the invitation for your interests and all the best to do to the students. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thanks. >> Filip De Turck: So all the best. with the Academic Thank finally, okay. Thank you. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thank you. Take care. >> Filip De Turck: now see >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Bye. >> Filip De Turck: you soon. Thank you. 