>> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Okay, so good afternoon it after some technical challenges so much for technology, right? >> Katia Obraczka: exactly >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: but we might hopefully so we are 10 minutes now past 1 pm Brazil time and very glad to my friend Katia obraczka directly from California, right I guess. >> Katia Obraczka: That's right. Yes. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Yeah and Katia she will talk a little bit more about her biography as usual. I don't introduce Are speakers because otherwise it consumes too much time, but I let you to introduce yourself. So I will go I will pass the slide. so and you will. know okay when whenever you need me to. To go through okay. >> Katia Obraczka: Perfect. Thank you so much. Thanks welcome everyone very happy to be here and talking to you. So Christian and I, you know have known each other for a while now not nothing, but tell you how how long but yeah, and yeah, so um today I'm gonna talk to you a little bit about our research on iot for social good internet of things of course right for social good. Um, and I was told that I talk needs to be in English. So this is it Um, so I am a professor in the computer science and engineering department at UC Santa Cruz. I've been there since January 2001 so you can see how long I also have been recently appointed as the Citrus campus director for UC Santa Cruz Citrus stands for Center for information technology researching the interest of society which is and if you are curious you can take a look at that link. This is a multicampus Institute uniting UC Berkeley UC Davis. You see more said and you see Santa Cruz namely the campuses on in the northern part of, California. next please Christian um, so a little bit about me so before I joined UCSC in 2001, I was a research scientist at USC's information Sciences Institute isai. Maybe you've heard of it. It is considered one of the the birth and and then I was also a research faculty at USC's computer science department. And then before that I did my my PhD in computer science at USC then got a master's along the way and then before that I was at the federal University J as we call it. I did my masters in Computer Engineering and my BS in electro engineering at um So a little bit about Santa Cruz. some of you may have not heard of UC Santa Cruz before so just wanted to give you a little bit of context. Where is UC Santa Cruz as you can see it's on in the Cornea on the coast very beautiful location. And again, it's it's part of the northern, California a part of the UC system and the UC system is a system of campuses that have 10 campy spread in around California in the south in the center and also in the north and yeah, and and so you see Santa Cruz sometimes is not much known so next slide, please. um because it is relatively a Young campus. It was open in 1965 and we had only 650 students. So pretty pretty small. It is the one of the youngest campuses for of the UC system the you know, I think it's the third youngest, you know after Mercedes the youngest and then Riverside and then Santa Cruz just for you to have an idea of how much we've grown in the last few years in the fall quarter of 2019-2020. We had say almost 18,000 undergraduate students across 66 undergraduate majors and almost 2,000 graduate students again across 64 graduate programs. A lot of people don't know but we are actually the campus the UC campuses is the closest to the Silicon Valley So we have a very strategic geographical position and because of that proximity we we are able to collaborate a lot of with the local industry in the valley. And in fact, I live in the valley I don't live in Santa Cruz so, you know, it's it's easy to go back and forth. Next slide please. So these are some of the pictures from the campus. It's beautiful as you can see it overlooks the Monterey Bay you which you see here and here and then on a clear day you can actually see all the way across the bay and you can see Monterey on the south side of the bay and we are on the north side of the Monterey Bay and and you know, we're located at on a hill that overlooks the whole Bay. So it's really really very pretty in addition to that. You can see it's very interesting vegetation wise you have like, you know, the Open Fields as well as the famous red trees or redwood trees. I should say, right so in the central part of campus, there's a lot of the redwood trees like, you know, which the Sequoia are part of next slide, please. um You probably know that the universe is in the US have mascots right and the mascot for you for UC. Santa Cruz is the banana slug as you can see, so this little you know. Slug and because of its color right? It's yellow color and it got the name banana slug, right? So the reason why it's this mascot for you CSC, it's because it's a very common inhabitant of the Redwoods. So we see them especially on a rainy day. If you go out in the in the Redwoods you see them walking around. So next one. and I'm not sure if you've recognize this picture, but this is from a famous. movie and you can see that John Travolta is you is wearing the UC Santa Cruz t-shirt. I don't know. Did you reckon do you recognize this photo from which movie it is anyone? Maybe not. something that you've seen it's kind of a older movie exactly. It's Pulp Fiction. Oh next slide, please Christian. Yeah, so there you go. It's a 1994 Quentin 13 Tarantino movie and John Travolta as you can see there is wearing the Santa Cruz at t-shirt. Okay next. so now more seriously about my research. so I work in computer networks. My brother area of research the internet, of course and then more recently Wireless networking including multi-hop wireless networks wireless sensor networks disruption tolerant networks iot Edge networks Etc. And by the way, I forgot to say that if you have any questions, I know we have a Q&A at the end, but if you have any questions, especially Clarifying questions, please. Feel free to interrupt Okay, so my research lab is called the Internet working research group inrg and again if you're curious about the projects that we work on you can go to that link. We are of course, it's always you know, we're always revamping the web the website, but you know at this point you have a good idea of you know, the some of the projects that we've been working on and our projects span a wide range of topics that of course are related to network came, but some of them are actually more systems. applications of networking. Some of them are more networking specific and and looking at basic Network research like, you know protocols so but basically our is motivated by this. enough the future internet and as you can see I'm using the small eye internet because the big eye internet is the internet which is an example of an Internet and and by the way, internet the the term internet is the short form for internet work which you know by definition is a collection of networks that are interconnected together right and the internet the big eye internet is an example of an internet work, right? So please, you know, just I wanted to make that distinction because a lot of people don't so we in the lab we basically design build evaluate tests and deploy protocols and systems for the future internet. So you may be asking what are future internets or you know, some some of us call it the internet of everything now, right and and again, of course there are many many ways to Define that or explain what that is for for us. Christian please next slide so we can see that I mean again, you know, the many many different ways to define the the future internet, right and and of course you see the cloud, right? And then which kind of was the is the core or is located in the core of the internet, right? And then over time then you have things that are popping up next slide, please in at the edge right that in that connects to the cloud or interconnects through the cloud, right? And and that is kind of the you know, what we consider the future a future internet work or the internet of everything which is again, you know connecting all these different types of networks, smart environments like smart buildings smart industry autonomous vehic. holes Foams Smart Homes smart grids Oh, I thought there was something a question on the chat but but no So this this Edge Revolution as we call it right has been sparked by multiple factors, right? You know, one of them of course is the increasing availability of Wireless connectivity. that has become more ubiquitous and more pervasive and of course the increasing availability of computing power at and user devices our phones and laptops Etc have become more and more powerful and the price has been going down right? So you have this explosion of these end user devices and the same time explosion of these new applications that are running at the edge of the network. So just a quick historic perspective, right the you know, the you know, when did the Internet meet Wireless, right? So that's kind of what I'm referring here as I internet 1G to internet. 4G right. So and then you can see here in the x-axis time and here some sort of the evolution of the technology in terms of the generations, right? So here in 1970s, as you know was around the time that the internet was born and it was called the arpanet. Because it was actually funded by arpa. Arpa, you may know is the research arm of the Department of the US Department of Department of Defense. And of course, they fund a lot of research a lot of basic research and the internet actually started with funding from them way back when and then in around 1990s then you we started having this explosion of the internet they basically because of the applications like email and the web right? That's when the web was taking off in the early 1990s right and some of us app as the killer app that drove the internet to start them right to to fame. Then in 20 in the 2010s smartphones came to be right and then and just to have an idea in 2007 the iPhone introduced the mobile web application, right and then around the 2020s. That's when we started talking about the internet of things or iot or machine to machine, right? That's kind of you know, that that got kind of give you it gives you an idea of Shanda was happening. Next slide please. Um, and I don't want to I know we had we started late so I don't want to spend too much time here, but this is just to give you context on when the Internet of Things became a thing which you can see from here this graph here right that in around between 20 at 2003 and 2010. there was more there were more connected devices than people in that though were connected to the internet. Okay, so that's kind of when you know, people started thinking about you know, the internet of things and you can see here the the evolution of the world population and here the evolution of the number of devices that people were using Next yeah. And this is again another view of this Evolution right the internet of places the internet of people the internet of things and then in the future, it's this is what people are predicting is the internet of wearable things, right? So you you're you're gonna have more and more devices that you're going to be wearing like these VR glasses, right and and Etc So again back to that. Figure that. We saw in the beginning of the internet of everything right including the edge. And and the edge is where the action actually is, right? The cloud is kind of a little more ossified, right? It doesn't change very much but the edge is actually where where things have been changing in the recent past. Next slide please. And this is another way to look at it, right? you know the cloud right and like a pyramid the cloud right? You know, the the second tier let's say where you have these devices that connect the edge to the cloud right? And then you have the edge. Okay. So this these are access networks, right radio access networks or your home your campus Network, etc, etc. Right and this is your the end user devices that can connect directly to the this layer or can be connected to other devices for me what we call an ad hoc network. challenges of course many many challenges because of scale right as you can see here. The prediction is that by 2030 will have between 50 to a hundred billion Internet connected devices. This is a lot right? It's a number that you know, we can we can even can even imagine right not just the scale but the heterogeneity of these devices like and and not just devices but the networks and of course these services and the applications that run on them and of course the autonomy and administrative decentralization that these networks are going to bring about because I mean, you don't want anyone to be administering your home network, right or your building Network or your smart grid Network Etc. And of course the challenges also bring opportunities, you know like scale means redundancy heterogeneity diversity autonomy and administrative administrative decentralization resiliency and and the ability and robustness, right? Okay. so I'm rushing through because I want to get to the actual projects. Where is the action again? The action is in the edge or at the edge right? and and that's kind of where these projects that I'm gonna talk to you about are happening. yeah, so we can skip those Christian and and yeah, I I so just be the one before I don't know. Wait, yeah. I don't know if you're familiar with the term Edge Computing. So I just wanted to intro kind of introduce it right, which is a paradigm introduced by Satya in 2017. where which says that substantial Computing storage resources are placed at the internet's Edge in close proximity to mobile devices or sensors, right? right? So again a lot of these a lot of these paradigms are happening because more and more. These are not just the devices themselves, but the applications that run on them need very strict quality of service requirements, right? So so you need to be to have the control of the network be close to where the action is. Yeah. So again, this is you know, why proximity matters so I'm gonna skip through that all and and that's another another Paradigm that that was sort of the term was coined recently the term agent intelligence, which is the convergence of edge Computing and AI. So, okay great. So now we can talk about the projects and then still have time for a Q&A at the end. So the first project that I wanted to talk to you about is the an Internet of Things. system that we are developing for climate resilience as you know, like in general but more specifically for environmental monitoring in particular for Wildfire assess a risk assessment. This is Joint work with a lot of people so they're all here. And in partnership with the with our campus fire department and and also Cal Fire which is the the department in California that takes care of our forests. And of course, you know is responsible for Wildfire monitoring. um I'm pretty sure that you already have heard of wildfires. A lot of people are surprised to know or to find out that they are actually unnatural phenomena. They occur naturally nature. The problem is that you know because of everything we know about climate change and and what's happening with the environment. They have become more frequent more intense more devastating and and unfortunately more tragic. and the the problem is that this is going to be this is likely to be an ongoing phenomenon, especially as us humans. encroached into these, you know areas, which are called wild or but interface or we as we know them. Um, so um, these these are pictures from the some recent fires in California. I'm sure you've heard of them. This was the 20 Oh, yeah this it's it's really hard for me to even look at this but this was 2020 a 2020 wildfire that burned these you know this number of Acres, which is again unprecedented and cost over two billion dollars in in damage and and suppression efforts. You can see from the the skies, right the the burned area that you know what this Wildfire cause this was actually a fire that happened during covid and it actually came one mile north of our campus and and it was horrible luckily because of covid the campus didn't have a lot of people a lot of because it was, you know people were actually working from home and and attending classes from home. So it was not two problematic, but it was very very scary. and and the campus had to be evacuated some parts of Santa Cruz had to be evacuated as well. So next slide, please. So talking to a fire managers and First Responders, you know what they kept telling us. is that early detection is critical right? Because it enables timely response enables them to allocate resources appropriately and enough time for planning and preparedness the problem next slide, please so why is it hard to predict these wildfires in a white in a timely manner the problem? is that what we have now doesn't have the necessary resolution the necessary granularity to alert First Responders when conditions are becoming more conducive to wildfires, right? So this is a just a picture of an automated weather station that is located in the state. But because these were I mean this is actually not too bad. It's pretty you know, Compact and light in comparison to more traditional weather stations, but still they're not easy to deploy and they're you know fairly expensive right? So it's not easy to dep. them in the quantities that we need in order to provide the adequate granularity that we need in order to be able to detect these wildfires in a timely manner next slide, please. so we so what we decided to do is to try to design a system an iot system. That will be low cost. um also compact with the necessary sensors that we can deploy in these remote regions. cheaply so that you can we can provide the necessary granularity for the risk assessment the Wildfire risk assessment models to be able to ingest that information and be able to alert First Responders when they need to pay attention to a specific region and and maybe start either deploying people there or throwing water or or retardant in that region in order to prevent a wildfire from starting. This week this this system. Oh, sorry Christian just a little bit just one slide back. Yeah. So again, this is challenging from an engineering point of view because given that the system needs to operate autonomously in these remote regions. We cannot guarantee that you're gonna be able to maintain them by a human right? So they must be operating what we call off. grid right off the power grid and off the communication grid and they need to be deployed in us in a scale that if for example a wildfire would would happen and some of them would be burned by the Wildfire or eaten by an animal, right? There is enough redundancy in the system that that doesn't matter right and they are low cost enough that they are pretty much negative negligible, right? So that that were those were one of our challenges in building a system like this next slide, please. So on that's Eureka is the name of our system. It's a low-cost scalable robust of the grid energy efficient system that can operate autonomously and continuously to monitor large outdoor areas. these the the current system. Actually you can Actually you can equip it. to do different types of monitoring for wildfires. We equip them with the sensors that you know, the fire managers and the fire on the fire emergency crews told us that they need for example temperature humidity soil moisture wind are the essential ingredients to a system like this. next so this is just a like. sort of a functional view of the system. you have the iot here that is deployed in the field right then you have it. It feeds the risk assessment model that is running in the cloud. Right? And then there is a decision support tool that also runs in the cloud. But also, of course he has a user interface to the man emergence the fire managers to give them information about what is the risk of wildfires in different the different regions at the system is deployed, right? It's an end-to-end pipeline that connects the ground iot sensor Network the Wildfire risk assessment tool and the decision support tool again. This is running at the edge. This could be running at the cloud and at the edge and the same thing here and then you can see the this feedback loop that the the actual the decision support tool can actually actuate in the iot in order to try to make the iot work the way it needs to work. For example, if you need the the sensors to sense more frequently or less frequently. Maybe you want to sense in a region rather than in another region. So you are able to to also actuate and also have a sense of how the system is working like, you know having Diagnostics about the Tea as well. I'm we're running out of time, and I do want to talk about the other systems at least a little bit Christian. So maybe fast forward here oh, yeah, so this is you know, yeah, so No 40. Yeah that one 43. So this is um, just a quick view of the current prototype as you can see there is a there is a solar panel and then in an enclosure you have we have the actual node with with its sensors right some of the sensors need to be outside of course, right and like the wind sensor and the temperature sensor. So again, they have to be weatherproof which which is another another challenge of deploying a system like that. next slide Okay, I think I would go forward. Oh, yeah, so one one back Christian one more. Yeah, just to show you this is where we are going to deploy the system initially. This is a an area on the UCSC campus as you can see. it's pretty you know, it's very um, the vegetation is pretty dense, right? So these are the Redwoods that I was talking to you about. So there is a natural reserve inside the campus and that's where we're deploy the system initially. and then test it over there with the help of the our fire department on campus. And and this is our hypothesis. Oh, sorry This is our hypothesis. Right? our hypothesis. Is that with finer grain environmental data, we can improve the accuracy of wildfire risk assessment and that's kind of what we need to test, right? Okay next. This is just a picture of you know the test bed in the lab as you can see we have three nodes and we're testing them in the lab right now in terms of Park consumption and also reliability the ability to send data reliably between these notes, of course, you know, this is easy, right because it's in the lab, but you know, we are also testing them outside. Okay, great. So, this is a what another one of our iot projects? This is an iot for healthcare and this is a again joint work. So the cool thing about these projects is that I get to work with all these amazing scientists in different disciplines, right? So for example on in this project I'm able to collaborate with a medical doctor you see San Francisco also research nurse at Davis so it is it is super interesting in that sense. And of course my colleagues a colleague Colleen Joseph Sanai unzao at UCSC with who are you know working in different in different parts of the system. The name of the system is purple purple for a stands for pressure pressure ulcer and prevention platform. I'm not sure if you've heard of pressure ulcers before. anyone I don't want to be redundant. No. Okay. Great. Thank you for the feedback. So pressure ulcers are also known as bad source. And they these are ulcers that form on the skin because of low profusion meaning low blood flow to that area of the skin of the body and this is usually because there is a lot of pressure like physical pressure on that part of the body caused by normally immobility so patients that are immobile for very very long periods of time and they have the tendency to form these ulcers these cars in in the in the on the skin. These are very problematic because not only they are very hard to treat and See when they appear. It's already too late to prevent them because they form from the inside out and also they may cause more other problems like, you know infections and Etc. So and and so this is a big problem for Hospitals and Clinics and long long term for care facilities that treat sick very sick people that are not able to move right? And this is just a like a quick fact that you know, it affects 2.5 million individuals in the US and costs the Healthcare System 11 billion dollars annually, so it's a big problem for hospitals because they are liable when these ulcers appear in their patients right currently on the interventions and and the techniques for preventing. These ulcers are very very antiquated. And don't really work very well. In addition. They are very labor-intensive and and because of that that they don't they're not performed consistently and and are not based on science Christian. I see you there. It's because of time right? Yeah, well, so let's let's run over these slides quickly and again, I has access to them so if you have any questions, and then you've also have the paper some of the papers that talk about them. So this is again a quick diagram that illustrates how the system works. This is one part of the system. This is actually the softer platform that will enable censor data from being acquired from the patient, right stored. And then you have the purple predict module which where the analytics run that will analyze that data and then you have a visualization module that will let the clinicians of healthcare team visualize the information raw sensor data as well as the analyze data. This is a picture of our current prototype and you see that it is connected to a bandage that was developed at UCSF. Where you have like built-in little sensor prep sensor pressure sensors that are embedded into this bandage, right? And then, you know, we are connected it to Pi map, which is the that platform that I described to you part of purple. Yeah, yeah, we can go to the next one and and here are the different ways to deploy the system right? You can deploy it, you know completely in the cloud. You can deploy it partly in the cloud and partly close to the patient. So the way the system is designed allows allows the system to be deployed that you know in different ways depending on the health care and resources. Next and then this is the last one and again quickly. This is again iot for resilient food production. So climate right as a whole and we call it Greener Greenhouse. So this is a project again with some colleagues of mine. You see a c and also you see more said and involves of course faculty and students and basically the idea is to design the Next Generation Greenhouse. that is energy efficient and resource efficient in general. So let's just move quickly. Yeah, we can we can go quickly here. Oh and then this is the paper that where it's like a white paper at this point. We are working on a more technical paper now, but this is a white paper that describes the motivation the system Etc. Again, this is online you can take a look at that, but A cool thing about the system. Is that instead of RF radio frequency. We are using visible light communication. So we are actually reusing the LEDs that are used to illuminate the plants in order to do two more functions on power the solar panels that are powering the iot tags as well as provide the downlink the communication down link to communicate with the iot tags. So so that is kind of the Innovation about this system. This is showing you a greenhouse on on campus actually another part of Campus that is close to the coast. This is these are greenhouses that we have access to and then next slide, please. So this is the greenhouse inside right? We have the the control part of the greenhouse and then you have the the traditional lights that we are installing new led a new LED light system there to be able to test our virtual visual like communication System next slide. oh, this is again a we are in order to prove our hypothesis right that you know, we're we're doing better than a traditional iot. So we have a we built on a traditional iot tag using Laura and this is the VLC base iot and you can see here on this side of the of the room the LED A system that we we acquired that we are going to use in the greenhouse. Okay the end sorry about rushing and going through the slides very quickly. But again, this is my contact information. This is the pointer to my lab if you want to see more of about these projects or other projects that we've been doing. you're more than welcome to do that and and let me know if you have any questions. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thank you Katia. Thank you. I am sure there will be many questions where one that I will throw to you is how do you manage to to put together this multidisciplinary teams? Because I I can't see Engineers scientists very diverse backgrounds And yes, how do you manage? how who drives these? Is there a funding is the other incentives? Let us know. How do you do this? >> Katia Obraczka: Yeah, I mean again, I I love these into interdisciplinary projects. I mean as Engineers, right? We are problem solvers, right? So in order to be able to solve real problems, we have to be able to contact the real people that are trying to you know that work with these problems on a daily basis. So, um one of the cool things about UC Santa Cruz I think is the because the the campus is not too big. And and also not too small. so we are able to connect with other with our Because again of these again there are funding opportunities that come up that actually require interdisciplinary work. the help the iot for healthcare one was actually brought To Us by the the doctors themselves, right? They they came to us and said, you know, we have this big problem. We cannot solve there's no current technology that help us. Could you help us and and come up with a system to try to solve this for us, right? So we're lucky that you know, because the UC system is so diverse, right and and but at the same time connected in we are able to collaborate not only inside you see Santa Cruz but across the campuses that Institute that I mentioned to you that now I'm I'm gonna director for it you see Santa Cruz also, incentivizes these into disciplinary collaborations through for example seed funding, right? So that is also something that really helps. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Nice. Yeah talking about campus. You can see the picture over here is the campus of unicam and there is a a big projects called have for sustainability. So they want to build a district for living Labs. So it resonates a lot with what you presented. So building a putting bringing together real programs interdisciplinary research in in the world. Okay. >> Katia Obraczka: know >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: so Katia, I'm sorry, but it's already our students have a duties at 2PM these classes right in the in the lunch time and I send you my best regards here from I'm right now at the foundation of Unicom. >> Katia Obraczka: wow. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: I'm sitting with Matt Daniels here. It says hello. We are having a meeting of our first year of This smartness research engineering Research Center that I look forward to to you more. >> Katia Obraczka: Of course. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Okay, and let's see if we can collaborate again. >> Katia Obraczka: Yeah, absolutely. I'll be happy to Christian and and you know, we are still we are all right still working with. Ramon, right? >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Yeah, >> Katia Obraczka: Yeah, >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: yes and also within rear in >> Katia Obraczka: Yeah, Ramon and with India. Yeah, and then actually I'm I'm actually going there probably mid-may. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: nice >> Katia Obraczka: Yeah, and and yeah, so, but hopefully I'll see you soon in you know 3D. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: in real in real not your reality. >> Katia Obraczka: Not not not VR real >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Okay. >> Katia Obraczka: not VR. Yeah, um and >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: So students are asking. How do you how do they go can get into this team? So maybe just dropping emails and and sending any interest I guess if they want someone wants to know more or potentially engaged reach by email, right? >> Katia Obraczka: Yeah, yeah, I don't know. I mean, I don't know if the brasilian government has been sponsoring these. Exchanges that they used to in the past right and like mattels, you know when he came here, right? You know that was sponsored by the Brazilian government, you know, there used to be you know, the science Without Borders right program. I also had a few undergrads that came >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: explanation >> Katia Obraczka: so but but now we can also do things remotely. So yeah, I think that the best ways to maybe look at these projects more carefully and you know, maybe do a class project right? I don't know if you if I probably you >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: nice >> Katia Obraczka: probably require Capstone project for >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Yes, we do. >> Katia Obraczka: Undergraduates or a master's right? So that's another way to you know engage. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Okay, great, then excellent. Thank you very much. >> Katia Obraczka: Sorry for the the technology glitches. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: That happens. >> Katia Obraczka: Yeah. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Okay. Take care. >> Katia Obraczka: Take care. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thank you. >> Katia Obraczka: You too. 