>> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: great another Thursday seminar life here with roots of Sofia long time that we know each other from different types of interactions. I've visited her in Portugal in the labs. Now. I know she's Germany and we hormone collaborators soon working in the lab and we'll see each other also in US CNC in Belgium next month Looking forward to catch up. And talking about catching up a root is bringing today a very interesting seminar and that merges a couple of Hot Topics right Internet of Things Edge Cloud Hear a lot about this. What is this continuing of each and cloud? and of course Energy Efficiency and resiliency, so relevant and of any networked system. As usual route. I am very informal so I'm not going to read your extensive bios our students and and Watchers can read and also follow your links your Publications for you connect with you over LinkedIn. And so with that I will pass you. So that you can present usually around 40 minutes and then we will chat and I will pick some. questions from from the class and also from our life. participants over over YouTube Okay. >> Rute Sofia: Okay. Thank you. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: So, thank you. >> Rute Sofia: So hi everybody and Christian. thank you again for the invitation. It is really also a pleasure to speak again with you and I'm really happy that we are going to to meet each other again in or have this chance in network because after covid as we all know. A lot a lot Rights happen. So as as Christian explains and let me see if I can move my Going to today's speak about this so-called. that's to glad orchestration. But before that I have a quick I hope introduction. So Christian didn't introduced me. I would like more to introduce what what I'm doing in Germany right now, So you see here my background and I'm not going over that what is important? I think for the seminar is for you to know that my background technical background is on packet based networking. So in the past I've worked on scenes like quality of service IPv6, but I've also worked on Mac layer design on high-speed networking and then also on wireless and since 2019 I moved to Institute in Germany called forties. We are in Munich. So in the southern part of Germany to develop a new team focused on Industrial iot so technically where we focus is on next Generation industrial iot applications, and our research is focused on the development of networking architectures and protocols because that's where my background and I think my best contribution can be and also on computational architectures So in a sense this is a mixed team and in this so intelliciplinary team, it means that my team has as researchers people that come with a background from networking like me. It's also people that have a background more focus in iot for instance with some knowledge on semantic Technologies and Distance in AI not on developing new AI models, but actually on in particular forage Computing and so the Institute where I am sort is you have here information. Okay. So is the software oriented Institute? So this means software engineering oriented Institute. We have a number of teams. So we call those teams competence fields and each team. Let's say with the teams are aggregated into three clusters one focus is on software engineering the other focus on Industrial or intelligent infrastructures and the third focus on robust Ai, and so this means that I said, there's also these interdisciplinary notion among me and Michael Leeds and let me give you also a quick view on how we what we do and how we perceive iot because that is important to understand our Notions of edge Cloud continue, right? So everybody speaking about these so that so in the industrial iot team Mauricio. Is that in order to enable Next Generation iot and these next generation iot will is comprising that will comprise mobile devices. So heavily will compress mobile devices, but also as we know very very small embedded devices, but it also involves people and it involves AI so cyber physical objects with cognitive capability and in order to so imagine all these devices and cyber physical systems interconnected and also people and interconnected by a system of networks, and that system needs to be a bit more clever than what we have today on the internet and so the vision of my team is that we think we should rethink and redesign to some point. of course some of the infrastructure that we have for iot and that redesign is based on considering a joint design. working and computation All the way we work is that we do research of course similar to what possibly you do with Christian's group and then our outcome is normally vital scientific Publications, but also and I think this is relevant open source software. So there's a link here. Okay that you can check with some of our most relevant open source software. Normally we have some demonstrators for the edge. So that's where we are for. now really going into the seminar So today what I bring you is some information about what is this Edge to Cloud Continuum, and then I'm going to bring an example based on a European project called quote echo on how we perceive these orchestration. What does this mean? What are we using in terms of Technologies? And then I have created also a few other parts on the seminar. Okay. So one relates to give you some information about use cases, so where do we need this? Where are these environments that are a bit more variable than the ones we have today on the internet and I bring also some information about how you can experiment with this project. So maybe this is interesting because we are developing a bunch of opens our software with a number of companies and academic Partners in Europe, and maybe this is interesting also for you as students. So but let's start by the beginning. So in order to explain to you On edge 12 Continuum we need to go back and to think about Internet of things that also to think about that now we call it internet things, but in fact, it's the internet right So the internet of things it's basically the internet since it's beginning. so since darpanet, so it's just that it has evolved and evolved and evolved. It is a complex system, but now it interconnects a lot more things most of the traffic is on the edge on on the fringes of the network. So the internet as it was designed there's a principle on which it is based called the end-to-end principle, which basically says that the intelligence is on the edge. So the intelligence is really on the system. There's nothing intelligent in the middle. We just have a bunch of Dentistry supporters. And that is the network. That's what normally what we call infrastructure or the network. But the issue is that with these new interconnections that we have now to the internet. Okay. so with our smartphones or with sensors also with more clever sensors that can already think and react. Also with satellites the notion events. What is The Edge on the internet is not anymore on the fringes. We cannot stay anymore that we really have applications on on the fringes and or on the extremes that they have the internet. And so this means that there is now the needs and a lot of people across the world. Are thinking about how to adapt to the needs that we have in your applications. So a fact is that isn't when principle is any way changing because we have also other things on the network we have programmable devices we have new ways to do to do computations or not necessarily just on the extremes of the network, but actually in routers already we can do caching in routers. And so these all changes the way we possess information but also that we compute the applications. And so where are we to the in terms of Internet of things so that's sort of how the internet is evolving. So you have here to figures that show a little bit the confusion that we have today on the internet. So on the left hand side you see that we think about the internet as this complex system. So we all know of course that there are differences in popularity. And we still have let's say areas that are so rural very rural that are very isolated with lack of Internet access we have some like a telecommunications still so not necessarily on rural areas. So I'm here in Munich, but if I go to a lake 80 kilometers away close it with the Alps then my my fourth reactsis disappears. So this is basically in urban areas. We know we have been support and outside. It's still a problem and we have something new which is spontaneous communication. So today on the internet. We also have the possibility to create infrastructures on the fly to with a specific purpose for instance emergency communications for health or after a natural disaster. So today these are functions that that we have and that we can we can the internet. So on the right hand side, that's the example that you have. so very stable televised infrastructures and then mobile. okay, integrating satellites uavs and so on but also spontaneous Communications and the mobile devices that we have today, they are also changing so they can do storage so our smartphones they can do this as you know, they can do Computing they can reason up to some point so we can have reasons there. And we have a bunch of different networking technologies that are supported. So this is becoming increasing complex. And so the idea of explaining this is to tell you it's not manageable anymore. Just based on human configuration. So it's not actually just a matter of for instance ensuring that all are at this points are well placed Etc or that our node Vis or our ran areas are well configured in fact the internet as it is evolving requires some facilitation have intelligence. that's it can easily adapt to new situations. So that is let's say the perspective of the internet right and then on the Internet of Things We have of course the networking part, but we have the systems. We have the systems that process data and that gives us level results about data. so Based on data sources and so on this slide what I bring you is Of for a principles or aspects that any iot system has and the issue is that today we have over 600 proprietary iot systems. So it is very hard to handle the interconnection of thousands or hundreds of sensors already for instance in manufacturing in factories, or even processing neural analytics, which is another example of industrial iot applying has already hundreds of sensors. And normally they would be connected via Ethernet of is the mother fixed form and that is being changed and and people are using more and more Wireless and cellular Network Technologies. So that's that's just the parts. That's what you see here represented as connectivity. What we also have on iot system are the interfaces to the user. So the human machine interfaces and we have the data sources, which can be our sensors that can also be people and can also be already as you know objects or cyber physical systems are really just softwareized agents such as an AI agent. So about a chatbot can be a data source or iot. And then of course, we have parts or systems or applications that process the data because that's the important part in iot and that store that data in a way. That is secure. We hope that it users privacy and also one thing that is becoming more more important is to ensure super energy. which means that the data can only be used by let's say their own shareholders or stakeholders and the data is let's say adequately certified or regulate within a specific region worldwide. So that's all is iot. Also, so when we think we speak about internet things except the thing itself is a semantic obstruction, so it's not an object. It's actually a description that we do today. That's describes the object. So the thing about is let's say descriptions. So embass is the description of an object. Okay, but it's also it can also embody the description of human behavior. For instance. I'm going outside and jogging and therefore I run at some speed okay, or I stop now. I am stop so that information can be seen as being sent from a little source and it is relevant for some applications. So this is internet of things but we spoke about Edge to powder extraction. So we are speaking about the internet the transport part the edges. So what the what is this Edge to plot Continuum and why are people calling it? That's the cloud continue. We're not just internet. So when we speak about the internet we focus more really on the infrastructure aspects. So on the transport of information and when we speak about urgent Cloud we focus on the data processing and on the data start storage. So on the Improvement of processes on the improvements of the performance of applications that we are using in some specific use cases or domains processing health or in manufacturing and so today. Okay, so there are different of course different terminologies for Edge. You will hear about depech farage and microwaves Nano ads. Okay. So today what I bring you is sort of a perspective. Okay, there are others that the perspective that we are pursuing heavily in Europe. Okay on the deepest is let's say what is far Edge and here and I'll explain also why we need to have that. difference okay, but the edge to plot Continuum is basically a representation. okay of all the computation and networking management and networking control that we need to do to ensure that the data is adequately processed and that we have the performance that we need for some application from match to Cloud. And wife rematch the plot and where is The Edge? So the edge is closer to the end user it was from Edge to Cloud because today most of the applications as you will see in some examples that I bring they are not anymore stored or computed just on the cloud and the reason for that maybe may have to do it costs but has also it's sort of a process has also to do with the technological Evolution that we have today where virtualization has gained the new space on internet and on the development of applications and where new application architecture so applications that are more modular. not not anymore. Monoblocking start that we merge and also finally Hardware that we have and the capability to have let's say more open Hardware more programmable Hardware So the representation that you have here is a potential representation okay of what is far engineer Edge and basically you see here the human and iot interfaces close to the real world. So close to the people. We are data sources other data sources are cars or other vehicles. So the so-called Vehicles where everything cameras them sensors like temperature sensors and other types of sensors. The forests today is connected to all the sensors that we as in users use close or in the real world, so they are not normally controlled by an operator because the operator does not have the rich to control them, but they are extremely important to the internet because that's where the data sources are. Okay, so to give an example, imagine your home. Okay, no notation. And then you have your network Terminator Okay, and you're access point collocated with a local router and then you have a bunch of smarts things in your home measuring a lot of things Alexa and controlling the light. So all that is the farage. So your operator, which is the network Terminator that he places close to your door, but beyond that there's no control and in fact all the data is there so We call that the far inch. In a factory we call the far Edge for instance involves all the equipment that brings data to the system and normally relies what with what we call a shop floor or could be a warehouse again. There is no control of the operator there. So in this design, that's where you see the far Edge. okay, simplified design and the mirror edge is actually the area that you operator controls. So a very known model. okay that you possibly know of for A near Edge is Etsy Mac. Okay. And so this means that what we do today and let me show you another picture so that I can give another example you have here a similar representation just a little bit more detail on the left hand side. You have the far Edge. So here imagine. This is for industrial iot. Okay, so imagine a factory and then there's a shop floor where we have conveyor belts robotic arms Etc and maybe we also have other locations like Warehouse where we have automated guided vehicles and all these so we call these the far Edge So normally this areas they are Private so in the sense that data can flow to the cloud but normally does not enter. Okay, so this is not because just of a firewall, in fact, there are protocols that are used such as opcua that don't allow this without specific configuration. So in manufacturing the the manufacturers don't want a redirectional communication as early. Okay, so and this is an example where Edge is important. So if all the diet can be processed and control and start that the edge that's something that is important for manufacturing and it's happening actually ready to die on this example. What I bring you is the blue box is they represent parts of applications. Okay. So for instance if I have an application that is monitoring the temperature in rooms then that application as you know, normally is possibly no is containerized. Okay, so that's what we do today. We we have maybe learner a Docker container to support the protocol that does the communication. Okay. We see way and PTT. We have a container that can give basic analytics. Maybe we have a container that handles with tensorflow some aggregation of data something like that and the deployments of those containers today is orchestrated by Liz's system. Okay. That The notes where we can place or containers that belong to an application and as a decision on where to deploy that those containers based on the need for CPU and memory. That kubernetes is not care about the network. Okay, so where that's is not know if it's deploying so to elements that need to be close together and have a minimum latency of 10 milliseconds to run together. Okay, for instance, so but basically what I'm also showing you is that this microservices are not anymore just computed at the clouds. They are actually being placed on different areas of these Continuum, So Edge to Cloud continue and this notion of edge to help continue has to do it computation. Okay, so we have two worlds the networking world and the computational world sort of colliding. So here you have an example for instance for the same aspect with for Consumer reality. So this would be forces in a city where we have some buses with some Edge notes. Okay. So these are as you know could be simple knobs embedded like a Raspberry Pi that's what is happening today could be something more clever like A regular laptop. which runs already some information for instance. Imagine on this bus. There are a number of users that since information take pictures see the status of the road. Not right notes on about delays and then that information is normally would be sent all to the cloud and what is then today already is that data is aggregated on on this yellow boxes. So on the on the edge, and then it's only process to the cloud whenever required. So this means that we reduce latency or at least intuitively we can reduce latency and we also reduce potential costs because we don't need to pass all the information to the class. Okay, and so one thing that is happening on this Edge love continuum. so devices is our internet is actually that this is continuing to change. Okay. So right now we still have let's say this notion of Internet of things but still static. Okay, so the routers are static so in the core most of the things are still static, but now there are new things becoming it's grated for instance. As you know, we have satellites satellites gives us great access to remote and large regions as you guys have in They are mobile they can route information. So today we have already the possibility to do routing. Okay on Leo constellations. So this means that these are edges and we will have to deal with this integration on the internet. Okay, so this Edge to Cloud Continuum will soon start to be very mobile and is already also in space. Okay. So the major major confusion, let's say so in order to ensure that we can let's say manage all these deployment of applications in this Edge to Cloud continuum. We have three Vogue a little bit the systems that we have and we're created more for clouds. Okay, so all the systems that we have and where we place our applications today. So Docker based applications, they were developed for the cloud and now they have to be adapted to these Edge to Cloud. where the micro Services of applications can be deployed anywhere to serve specific requirements at an application has like lentacy or bandwidth or cost but also to serve preferences that the user the user may say, I don't want my data versus imagine in health. It's really go to the cloud. I wanted to stay on my Edge my home for instance. And so in order to articulate these we need let's so let's say a knowledge plane or some tool that can do better articulation and on this slide you have a summary which you can check. after a About what is what we need to make this. Let's say Edge to cloud computing really work and I would say that from my side and in addition to AI that we are all speaking about right and the role are generative AI etc. Etc. But I think that is extremely important is to ensure that we can find a way to develop architectures that do joint computation and networking and so John Gage. Okay sets a long time ago. That's the network is the computer and that is actually I would say that the internet now is the computer. Okay, so it's happening more and more and more with a lot of efforts based on human configuration. And so in order to to invest these okay, so there are a number of challenges and the next slides so I'm going to go a bit faster over this because I would like to to give you an example we disconnect about how these orchestration can be then what does it mean? What do we need? So there are a few challenges. Okay. So if we want to advance to this Edge Cloud Continuum that will have large-scale very dense areas a very small in them sensors and then also have to handle that already clever sets of satellites and devices on the air plus our personal devices that are increasing their intelligence. There are a number of challenges that we have. address in computer science and from our perspective. okay here in my team and my view is that there are these there are much more challenges but these are the ones that we are focusing upon focusing upon. so joined computation networking to us is crucial ensuring that whatever you do if any AI if we need an AI system it can run on top of mobile systems not necessarily seller, but I'm saying we're routers maybe mobile. We're not just our our interviews the device is our mobile and context awareness. So brings them information about the user about the application and about to surroundings where the application is running. and so for that we have a number of topics that were we are working and so today I'm going to collect all this project that I'm going to speak about gives you an additional more Hands-On inside into the first topic which is this flexible wedge Cloud Continuum where we are trying to create a framework that's not only is more flexible. So allows to support mobile environments, but actually brings resilience and one of the one of the let's say on bizarre expression on these management one of the goals that we have is to reduce the energy that is required to do the art expression. Okay. So another is of course improve latest latency or increased throughput that we are also very interested in reducing latency. so this project as I explained is a large project that so we have a few of these you possibly also I believe they're also common projects between Brazil and Europe. I also have some students there. So but basically this is a large project involving 16 Partners now across Europe you have the logos that the main ones there and where we decided So based on this Vision that you see and that we have in parties we decided together. Okay to create an open source framework while they call means cognitive centralized Edge to glad orchestration. that's has the difference of trying to inject into these archustration data metrics compute Matrix, which means observation a CPU and memory and network metrics. which means observation of perimeters such as latency, but also bandwidth congestion Etc and the reasons why we decided to do that, so the challenges are the ones that I just explain. And so what is the status of the piece? This project has already one year of living in June actually will be 18 months and we are so we have already some code released which you can play with I will explain also in an adventure slides, but more importantly we will release the full framework all components in June. So in this project we are trying to work straight The Edge to Cloud Continuum that of course because this has to be a bit more practical. We selected a number of use cases. So today, let's see if I manage to speak about one, but you have here examples. So you have the the use cases that we are doing. Okay, and you also have information and there's a report that explains all these so but let me then go to the notion of orchestration still from a high level perspective but to give you so basically of course when we go from idea, right, so these that's called Continuum. We need to manage it. How can we do it? How can we work the computation layers? Okay plus the networking layers all together because these are normally separate worlds in computer science and then what to use in practice. Okay. So what we decided to use was to create this framework around Hoover dance, and why? as I explained most of the iot applications in this really iot applications. They are containerized today. We all use Docker even for fun. And so this means that kubernetes is the manager that handles how these microservices will be deployed. And so what we decided to do was to create a framework, that's so framework means sets a software components that can work with kubernetes. So they are modular some are independent. Is for instance we have a scheduler It can be used instead of the kubernet scheduler and we have an orchestrator based on AI you can be used together with kubernetes must not necessarily with our scheduler, but it is also intended to be worked as a whole and the the key aspects you have here. So this framework. Why does it run? So here you have a representation for instance two edges, and I'm just giving you a high level example on how these woodwork. Okay. So this means Francis emerging that's on edge one. I'm running some application. Okay, so this could be again to make it simple observation of people so meaning the number of people in a building or in a room. okay, or could be environmental observation and let's suppose that that service is running on edge one and now there's a bunch of users moving more wedge to okay and basically for their who can be placed in the edge can be placed also on the cloud. So here's the representation. There's not mean that go there for necessarily has to run on the well and basically what it can do is based on some external injection of perimeters external here means for instance user moves or 10 users moved. So in fact, we should activate the service. that was observing the room in everyone in Edge to because now we have not many people there or maybe it is empty or maybe it's it is night. So these are external. Notions of context. Okay context awareness and and we want to activate that service on on the second Edge. Okay, and then the service starts running and all the let's say all the networking interconnections and the computational aspects have to be adapted and that's what connect with us that adaptation smoothly or we hope it will do it smoothly. So so then what does what does this project has? So in order to create these notion of our situation we decided as I said to create modular components and you have here some examples. So for instance we start you see here the user so the user is for instance a person that wants to deploy an application. So imagine you want to run some application with a mobile robots Okay. So with some friends and that mobile robots uses slam. okay, which is extremely heavy and so the first the first aspect is normally when we work these today, we upload the applications somewhere with kubernetes. Okay. So first we do it's Docker have or we use some other tool and then we just say Okay. I need the CPU. I need this memory and I want to run this for a hundred days. and kubernetes does wonders. And basically places things in specific notes, but but in terms of the so in terms of the of the network as they explained there is no realization of what is going on. So maybe the node files are the lead files between the nodes and therefore our application cannot run kubernetes does not see that so what we do with codec with that so we have this interface to the user and as you see here there is here something called create as control plane. So this means here we will link overheads and then we have a number of components that two different things for instance. MDM can injects data observability to the system for instance. It can say that the database has one style database of the application. So imagine there was a problem with the database with the data sources and it went style or actually, that's it grew too much. Okay, and we need more another note to run the application or or to the database. We have also the brain let's say the Arts writer that relies on AI to analyze how stable is the system over time. So the the here this these components that we call pdlc it does not the decide where to place the application it simply tells the scheduler of which is the entity responsible to place the application or its components on different notes. Okay, so imagine a graph and nodes and the schedule of decides on how to do that. So pdlc tells the scheduler. Hey, I think that the best option to you to run this application based on prior learning. Okay is actually to deploy it this way. That's a scheduler makes the final decision on how to do that. We also have as you see here. We inject some Network information. Okay, so we bring some information for instance bandwidth congestion, but also other interesting things for instance energy. It's expense on the connections that are on the transmission on a specific note. So that's the orchestration. And so what is the status of this now? I'm going to jump you have a much much more slides. So as I said you have if you want to read more, okay about houses this work and what exactly this is we have to large reports and also some papers. Okay. so we collect everything on Augusto which is an international database open and here what you have is the architecture of called Echo. So meaning the software part what exists already has open source is in green. What is still not uploaded? So once again, I did not mission. is that code is in an eclipse repository and what is still not available is in red, but until June there will be a version available. And so I'm going to jump over a few slides. Okay, because I would like to go to these guys but on these Slides you have more information about each of these components if you want to understand more. What we do, okay. you also have some examples of Matrix. So I'm speaking about metrics and data. But what exactly do you use and you have here? Okay. So for instance that observability we collect information about the databases the freshness compliance. So whether Francis in Europe, we are all into this gdpr and data protection and therefore sometimes we cannot run applications outside Europe and therefore this is an option of compliance for instance and but we also collect some other information. Okay, which you can see here and I think the most interesting and we which is the one that we are still not yet completely integrating is actually something from Mission about user preferences. Okay, so this could be very simple examples for instance of location not personal location. Okay. So this would be also skated market location. So just points and nothing personal here. It's more about preferences. I said it's different if a user is running an application. Have a number of use cases. So in the use cases, what what we do is that we try to create write an environment that we've thought was meaningful for code Eco to show how code they could perform and why we need something like today and we have six use cases very different. So take a look because they are interesting and there's a lot of information already about them the start of the development of these is that right now most of the use cases have already equipment set up and installed at a lamp. Okay, but now some of them are starting the second place which is integration in operational environments and for instance one of them that I bring to you is from University of getting and being then with the city of getting and where the colleagues and are deploying using Edge Computing and here forces you see, okay, so there are some locations in the city and what they want to do so they already have an edge note that says system information. They also use leaders to understand traffic patterns and they hear they give a very very simple example okay of what happens for instance they have questions around the city each of them includes two to three nodes. We call this the cluster. Okay, and they are processing data and maybe in some cases it would be best to redistribute that processing and for instance an example. very simple that they give here is for instance at night where we have a direction of traffic with a lot of heavy traffic and What we have maybe on the other side some Edge note collocated with cameras processing barely nothing and so in the in that case some of the processing should be passed to the edge notes that are almost empty and that's where what that go enters Okay. So podeco does not play with the application. There's not even no the application. Okay. So the application is like a black box, but it can pass part of the application and information so database status two other nodes to redistribute the load to reduce the energy that we need to reduce the latency that we need for the specific application. so I'm now going to jump across the others, but as you see you have some information about it, and also there are contacts around if you want to speak with the people. and I would like to call your attention so that last slides to several things. So the first is that you can already if you are interested on these experiments with code Echo and we would be very glad if you do so because at different levels so in the gitlab repository of codeco you have not only the components that you also have information about how to Randy so you can just run it for the purpose of experiments. Okay, really using the images that we have created or you can really download the code contributes. Okay, and this is open source, so that's Really a great world open so you have all the components of codec already with with some parts and then you also have something that we find very interesting which is an experimentation framework that we are developing. So actually is led by our colleagues Latina in Greece and they have developed really a pipeline for experimentation that you can do with code Echo. So this means you want to do some experiments, but you don't understand kubernetes and you don't know exactly where do I get to that and how am I going to install for their own and they have created a framework that you can just download and do some tests and devops everything from from start when he has examples of applications. We have a data generator. Of course I said notice that is our first place of work. So not everything is perfect, but you can already experiment we are doing the same and it works well and so meaning The experimentation format you have it here and you can see better. So there are also a few Pipers in the nodu about this about what what we can do and what you can do yet at least you have already the new scheduler integrated. So this means that you can play with some applications and try to do deployment to comparisons with coordinates and experimentation framework does everything so it deploys everything and that's the collection of measurement parameters of all code that whole components. So it's very useful. To play and to do some experiments and the rights and some papers. so you can also final slides promise to slide so you can also engage with us. So as other projects large projects, we have a program that is actually starting now. so started in April led by our partner Inova and that basically sort of an engagement program. So we are doing multiple events. You see there. Okay, and we're going to give some awards. We also give the possibility to participate in some events. Not necessarily just project events, but for instance scientific workshops or conferences where the project is involved and so as you see there, okay, and so this is another way to get engaged. So this is my last slide. You have all the links here. And I thank you for your time. And let's hear your questions. Thank you. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thank you Ruth. Very interesting. Stuff. I was already here a browsing through your website the open source repositories as you know, I am a big fan of Open Source open research and I I think I will try to borrow some of your nice ideas in the project. I really like the this packaging approach that you are trying out and sharing here a little bit just about the you the project website this Pro this program is also very interesting. This is a UI type of initiative so that they encourage all you projects to to do this ircp program to engage. It's very nice to see the maturity of how projects now are embracing open source in a much more. Let's call it effective and professional way. Yeah. >> Rute Sofia: Right, I think. there's as you know, Christian a strong push. Let's say in Europe to this. So do this and across a lot of things right? And I'm very that we managed to convince even the large players in in the projects open everything. Okay. So what sort of wasn't interesting process I would say but very happy for this. Okay, so everything is really open. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: thank you a great great example and I'm sure we will. have opportunities to to collaborate. Let's let me take one question from my side, which is related to one question that appeared over YouTube. And and first and I must confess. I was not aware about this fear. So this near and far Cloud there and and I know you were working user-centric. So for me you used to Centric near was like close to the user and far far from the user but your perspectives are from the >> Rute Sofia: exactly >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: centralized operator Cloud view so near from that and far from from that right? just a matter of perspective, right? >> Rute Sofia: Well, I mean, no far is really considered in user as close to the end user recipes possible. you are right. This is the Telco perspective, but in fact is what is being used across all industry here. Okay, so meaning in Europe and even by so let's say the European commission. Did you connect? okay for instance farage is really on the fringes, Okay, so it is indeed there is an adoption of of the Telco Centric. Let's say Perspective. Okay, so not the American folks perspective, but Europeans help perspective. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: I will need to ask my colleagues that work here in Brazil. What is our perspective? Maybe I can bring it to you. What is para near because in Brazil as you know are near and >> Rute Sofia: Yeah, for instance. It's also forces Huawei calls it here deeply Edge. I think if I'm not mistaken or I >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: yes. >> Rute Sofia: think IBM called micros always the same. Okay, so we're very civil. So fog is so there's also okay, but let's this is indeed the approach being used. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Good good to know we need to to we're always up to date and one of the questions from ADI Ariel was is it the same as Folk for computing was a term that has already sometime. How do you relate folk would be the near Edge or or >> Rute Sofia: Yeah now actually Focus both right so you you don't have it here, but fog the the concept of fog is more American very interesting. Okay from I think Roberts right and Cisco or not long time ago, and it's actually so, you know, we have these different views and Europe is really more focused on boxes usually but basically fog is more variable. Okay, so it's actually covers for Edge to me a edge, but it's more Flex. Go because it doesn't Focus so much just on focus more on the functionality on the functions that we have. So I would say that for computing is actually the same thing more or less. okay with a bit more flexibility than far engineer Edge. So I think that the key difference here, is that when we say farage, there are a number of things that we cannot compute yet close to the resources. Okay, and so people in Europe are trying to go so to push functionality even from the network. So the aggregation right as far as possible sources and this is farage. Okay, so if you go to fall, so let's say let's tell call Mark competitional View. And fog is more flexible. Okay. There are also so on the paper that this is a white paper, but you have information about that about the different models and also about origins of four Computing. There was something before Computing Okay, so they're old ideas that anyway come to life and what is happening now or happens if you're 20021 >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Good good. Thanks. so I'm brushing here through the questions of of this students that I say explain to you. They do some homework on on the topic of the seminar. So and I spotted here a common. a type of questions around the security aspects here. They one was very explicit here asking. what are examples of security a challenges what are key challenges with the and you talk also exemplified. I know it's very much related to Industrial use cases. So the devices are out there. So anyone in theory could have physical access, I guess that's a concern or someone who pick up this device and then try to break it or what would you? >> Rute Sofia: Okay. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: share about the security >> Rute Sofia: so >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: challenges >> Rute Sofia: so right as you know, what happens now is that basically everything is very statically configured. Okay, ACLS and service level agreements and then also really hard. Let's say access to devices. So you mentioned manufacturing. No, there is no access to the manufacturing environments. They are closed. Okay, they can send information. Nothing can answer. That's how it is. words today so they can even disconnect if they want from the club because okay. There's also I possibly you you all know. Okay, so there's this notion of industrial Edge a big push from Siemens about equipment. that's is let's say a little scale lower than clouds in terms of computation and runs in the edge is very, well. There's all the processing now, let's suppose on this new environment as you said, okay where there is more flexibility, and now let's qualify. you can show you and so for some this kind of environments on the right hand side. where now we have some manager, right and we are orchestrating these vegetables. What are the issues that we have? So of course as you know, we send some it's not that for instance an old enters suffers with kubernetes today. You have a list of suitable notes, right and those nodes whereas if you use AWS or whatever. okay online Cloud space as you know, all all the notes are just worthy for them at least. Okay, but there are the problems. So one is being interest worthy ensuring that's not the malicious user. That's how it is done today, but another problem is I said is compliance. Okay. Can you run your data there? Can you run your application there? Okay, and your country is it's regulated to the carving believe to the rules of of your country. Okay. And so that's another aspect now if we move to something where we need code there. Okay, where? more variable and now when you know the answers like your smartphone, how can we know? it's just worthy. Okay, so there are several ways one thing that we are looking into. okay, which I did not explain a lot more technically. Is that like we just browse there so I don't want to take a lot of time but let me see here. Is that on this on these are expression and using Ai and on this election of notes. We use something called or we are we have proposing to you something called swarm Computing where the notes where we are going to so the suits of all notes for this graph. Okay into deploy the applications they will we'll set first some contracts. Okay based on DLC. Okay. Okay, so based on a ledger technology So to be more clear and so this means that before starting something we are using smart contracts. Okay, but of course there must be some levels so that there's one why one is okay on my graph. I just use these nodes because I trust them that's a normal way. Okay that we all do to we know once really to use this more. flexible stretches. What can we use? Okay, and one thing that has been used in the past, but we are not doing it. Okay is actually Trust management as we do with humans. Okay, so it was quite used in opportunistic routing for instance. where we negotiate trust or we have some rewards okay or some incentives for good behavior. so that this does not undermine attacks that we may have but actually create systems that are more just worthy. Okay. So for this decentralized systems more flexible decentralized Stress Management is something that would be relevant to consider. So >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: yeah, so >> Rute Sofia: for the second part which is attacks Okay, so somebody injects malicious information may happen. Okay. So your application runs like crazy becomes greedy. so codec was prepared for that. Okay, so we have sort of a governance and resilience framework that we are building. Okay, but there's some rules so that we can test and prepare the system so that no application can can do that. Okay, but let's see successful. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: the other being big thing before we've finalized that the time passes so fast, I was spotting here is as you put all those in the in the Titleist energy efficiences. We know sustainability is a big topic there are so to say easier targets, so a device level a compute level to do energy efficient aspects. What would you say? It's the code they call Main. goal or Innovative approach towards Energy Efficiency or new insight or some insight that that you are. Working on what could you share around it? >> Rute Sofia: so I I saw in this slide that you have. So what we are doing is so notice it for as Energy Efficiency is not about the machines and making them work better. So imagine a graph where this applications are deployed. We are looking at the networking level and computational level. Okay. So what we are trying to say, is that okay. I'm going to select the graph. Okay the nodes and there is a connections so that it reduces the energy consumed and we call that greenness. Okay, and basically let's say users says I want to operate my application and they sure that I don't know. Okay, I never reach 80% or of the full capacity of the system or that I want to keep energy consumption on these level. Okay. So in our case right now is really energy consumption so battery of the notes. And energy through used during transmission. Okay, but could be other things would be CO2. We are not doing that yet. So and what we do is we created some functions. Okay, so something that we use on the Let's say on dark straighter on the AI based Ox writer which give a cost to an old. Okay where that costs the greenness cost of the node relates with let's say the number of application it is running and so on. Okay the battery test and so with the Transmissions that it's doing. okay, so we create we have functions that's you have here an example. Okay, so there's Global so if you want to test still very I would say initial at this part of the functions that we use, but you can play with it. And so basically the idea is that okay, so that's where we play with energy. So we are saying we select the graph where the notes have a minimum energy cost or where the graph is the minimum energy cost and taking into consideration other parameters as well. Okay, and that's so one thing we have to do is to prove that this is actually the best option. Okay. So right now this is life, let's say we are doing this because we believe it will improve over all the system. That's We did not completely validate it yet. Okay in large scale or something like that. Okay, but that's the idea. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Yeah, the energy domain is is huge. It's a must say it's to embrace it as a as another research Contin. consideration. >> Rute Sofia: Yeah. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: It's it's >> Rute Sofia: You have a case of a use case. Sorry to just wear about really energy where colleagues from University of polytechnica de Madrid >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Oh. >> Rute Sofia: are using codec proposing to use code Eco to improve the smart grid operation. Okay, so you can check this. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Good. Yeah, I have some colleagues and background over there. So let me wrap up first, of course. Thank you rute. It was great having your your seminar. They open source out there. I will spread the word and let's catch up more and talking about catching up. Let me just share with everyone what is coming next next week? This is a topic you you will certainly like because it's related to Industry time sensitive networking over Wireless. So that will be next Thursday seminar by Dave from Intel and then we'll have an alumni from our faculty at Google working on. on Gemini this generative AI work and then we have others still for this first semester in our queue. So router. Thank you again. See you soon. >> Rute Sofia: Thank you, Chris. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Keep safe. >> Rute Sofia: See you soon. See you >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thank you. 