>> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: It so good afternoon another Thursday seminar Thursday 1pm Brazil time. very glad to have today Dave cavalcanti is a principal engineer from Intel. He is originally from Brazil. And the topic as I posted it over LinkedIn, it's very timely. It's really about time sensitive. aspects of networking very challenging aspects in wired networks and even more in Wireless and Wi-Fi 5G and the evolution to our six G. type of deterministic communications for use cases in multiple areas in robotics in entertainment. a very interesting topic where the industry I would confess my feelings. that is Advanced compared to Academia in a couple of Senses. That's something we we can discuss later with with Dave and what their academic could do to to contribute more to this field. This is my own challenge in the research group in our research activities to to become more and more competent in this topic. As usual they I don't spend time. It's about time making most of out of our time in introducing our guest speakers always with a very interesting And curricula so everyone can check out the extensive achievements of Dave and with that. I pass you the floor. is you yours. So about 40 minutes of presentation so that we have then 15 minutes for for a chat Q&A from from our viewers life. and from the officially a roast students that have done their homework, and they have plenty of questions for you. Let's see Much the time allows us for this chat after your presentation and thanks again for for accepting reputation. >> Dave Cavalcanti: All right. Thank you Christian really glad to be here and and For the invitation always good to be sharing this topic which you know, I love to talk about with the team in Brazil. And as you mentioned, you know, I am originally from Brazil. I'm from the state of pardonable called I graduated there in undergrad and then did my masters also there and then came to the US to do my PhD so I've been in the US for around 20 years and that's always good to keep the connections to my colleagues in Brazil. So with that, let me give a brief outline for this discussion today I separated into Parts first. We'll talk about the need of time critical Communications right from any applications and these are really exciting times and our share some of our experience and some of the applications that are driving these need for from networking with Precision Time and and I'm what we call time sensitive networking as well. And then we'll go a little bit into why Wireless is important. What are the special needs for wireless and challenges as well? and then on the next second part, I'll try to cover more the advances in the technology what is happening in Wireless? We call it a wireless DSN in general. For you know, representing Wireless technology that can provide more determinist Communications and time will cover a little bit of a Wi-Fi and a little bit of 5G and talk about some of the activities we are doing to drive the deployment of these the industry and ecosystem and yeah, I'll try to close with some feature directions and there are a lot of that interesting research challenges in this space. So I hope that will be interesting for you as well. So let's go ahead and start. You know, we only see increasing need for a low. latency High reliability strict time Precision tasks in many domains right many markets. One of the marks that driving a lot of these requirements in the last few years is industrial robotics. You know automation Factory automation. That's one area where people trying to be more efficient than trying to move to more softer defined systems. And that puts a lot of requirements on the network actually and I'll talk more exactly about how you can model that problem. But you know there is a need for for that kind of strict time and timeliness right the ability to deliver data within some bounded latencies in this market also other areas that is coming up recently is the immersive experience right the interactions with world. And the reward and this has to happen real time. And latency and Time Performance is very important as well. So those are just a few examples, but there you can find. time critical applications across many Industries power energy agreed within Vehicles autonomous vehicles. Those are all good examples of that, right? Just to illustrate one more one specific case right as I mentioned earlier. the industrial industry automation industry is really driving some of these requirements and one of the Transformations happening that Industries really moving from dedicated devices or controllers or sensors, right? that will run a control Loop. in the field distributed that a device only those one thing that's kind of traditional automation model the reason movement to trying to leverage a lot more software defined capabilities like in it right a lot of things move to the cloud. And this is Transformations also happening days domain, right? where a lot of these controls functionalities are trying to be moved, you know from dedicated Hardware. Which are very expensive to make and a very specialized to more general purpose compute right on the on the cloud or depending on the latest requirement. What we call Edge compute is a where you'll have some of this compute capability and infrastructure that's closer to. To the factory floor. Let's say right so that is the cloud Edge automation model. So there is a transition happening this industry. and that means the you know, if you think about controlling a robot right remotely from an edge serve or from a cloud you can think about. Okay. how do I get this sensor data and how I get the automation data back? And if the robot has to be controlled every 2 millisecond to tell the position of the arm, you can imagine this will be a very strict requirement for the network and that's what's happening in the industry. So we are trying to build networks that you know in the past was just trying to be optimizing throughput. And you know what we call the real time in the past was something like well browsing and you know interactions. Which you know, it's not at the same level as this new applications requiring right in terms of latency. Now, you're talking about single digit millisecond, you know, not 100 milliseconds. So these are really Time critical applications, and this is putting a lot more. requirements on the networks to deliver this data with determinism. Another area I mentioned briefly is the inversive experience, right? So again, extend the reality mixed reality of virtual reality where people interact with real-time systems. that's another good example. and in a way this kind of interaction has shared a problem with would the Industrial Automation industry as well. where you actually have to get data or sensing data out of the the real devices and then compute that in the cloud and then come back on the edge right and then come back with an actuation and show that in some kind of visualization, right? So that's another example of these Loop. You know, there is a control Loop here right in terms of sending time critical sensing or data. It can be used a tracking or can be tracking a robot and getting the actuation back which could be displaying information could be an action to a robot. So this is a fundamental requirement so that the network delivers this dating with boundary latency, but also they compute capability also is important to be done in real time, Right? And so that is that's what's writing their need for the advice of the networks and also they compute side right so that then we're going to you know what we call time sensitive networking is how you make general purpose networking. time critical right of meeting this time critical requirements and you know, the requirements can be divided in Humane categories one is is time synchronization. actually some applications do need access to Accurate or precise time references if you think about sensing and sense of fusion applications, there's an example where you'll need that. Another major requirements what we call timeliness is the ability to produce a result Data within a deadline, right? So that's very important for many applications, especially when you're doing that in software in the edge or in the cloud. You depend on the data being transmitted the compute action being executed within that that latest bomb so Think about this your things latency bounds or deadlines and then times synchronization, which means executing something at the right time, right? So those are the the fundamental requirements that we call it generically Time Performance. And here a few examples. examples. I already mentioned some right. You see the industrial control Loop where this tasks happened in a tightly isoctronous control. So keeping track of time. Keeping track of these. You know a latency bounds which are you know times when you have to transmit the sensing data or you have to receive the activation and if you miss that window a robot made me set task right or maybe miss a package in the conveyor belt. you know, these are some examples. Or in a external reality if you miss this actuation or the sensing you may have bad performance in the bad user experience, right? One of the big challenges to make this happen today. Is because we need all of these. To share the same network and the same computer resource, right? and like if you dig a little bit deeper into the industrial segment right you'll see actually Many factors already have Solutions right to control robots these Control Systems being running for decades already. So that's not really new technology. But the way they solve that problem is by creating dedicated networks actually dedicated field buses. Like there is a dedicated wire. To come, you know to connect a sensor to a controller, right? and that works fine, but you know only scale and specially that doesn't doesn't take advantage of standard networking Computing resources that are widely available, you know technology like ethernet and Wi-Fi or even cellular right? They had their own proprietary Solutions and that's a transition I mentioned. All these industry are trying to move to a model where you have a generic Network, you know, it could be your Wi-Fi network or your internet for structure your schedule Network. and then you need to run all these different types of applications in the same network. You know could be some applications are delayed tolerant, and that's fine. Some may need some real-time interaction users, but some really need hard real time guarantees, right and some are safety critical. And that's really the problem. How you You can run these applications in dedicated networks today, but you cannot really run all of them together in a same network. where you guarantee some of these. data right will be delivered, you know within certain that lines. so that's the challenge and you know to have these distributor Computing networking with the time it is and and there are two parts of the problem here at least from you know our side also at Intel the two ways. we looked at this is we need to have determinist within the system and by the system here in this slide. I mean like within the compute platforms right within our our city use our servers or client devices, right? And that's something we call time coordinary Computing. So you need to compute with Precision Time. And with the timing is execution right wise. but also now since we're Distributing Computing across the network The Edge and the cloud. We need the time it needs between this systems, right And that's where the time sensitive networking comes in where you need technology that can guarantee the data is delivered with the communism across. Across multiple systems, right? So so this is the overall problem. We need to solve. so now I'll dig a little bit deeper into the time sensitive networking side. So that's really the the networking capability. And the other thing we try to use here is all based on standard right we want to have open. platform that we use industry standards so that we can leverage, you know widely available silicon and devices that are not specifically built for a certain application right and the way we do that is by defining standards for this technology and they're already very well known successful standard connectivity like internet Wi-Fi 5G, right 6go come. And what? the DSN test group in nitripovi 802 group did always doing is to Define tools that can enhance. This underlying communication or connectivity standards to make them more deterministic right and to make them available in you know with with these guarantees and so that they can be used to enable those time critical applications. So this DSN tools are defined to build on top of the existing ethernet. Wi-Fi 5G. So they don't really replace those systems. They are kind of a link layer hence means that you put on top of the existing systems, right? So that's the way we look at TSN. And what are the core elements of this technology, right? There are many of them, but we can summarize them at least. What the industries actively working in implementing now, are these three things right at this point? One is time synchronization, right? How you synchronize time across devices in the network? And and the other is how you schedule your traffic or how you coordinate the resources in the network to make sure. That the time critical data is always protected against congestion, right? So one of the problems in the networking right when you're trying to share the network without these these types of applications that have mixed criticality. Is how you you know you at some point if the network is free. That's okay. Everything is very fast. The problem happens when there is congestion right? You have keys building up on this which is or the access points or the base stations. And then how a Time critical packet comes right that you need to send to a robot for example, and they find the congestion right? Then it gets dropped. Oh it gets delayed. So how you avoid that one of the approaches? Is to reserve resources ahead of time. to make sure that when the concretical traffic comes they're always going to be a resource to to handle it at the right time. So that's under these area of traffic scheduling your time over schedule you talk a little bit more and I'll give some examples always we apply this into Wireless domain for example. and the third pillar which is very important is how we manage these systems right because as You know, I I indicate with the scheduling case. If you have to reserve resource for something to ensure that I mean isn't You need to know ahead of time right? When is that gonna come because otherwise if it's random anytime that because very hard so there is a need to actually manage the the POS of the traffic in the network with some capables to detect those streams set them up and then configure the network resources so there's a lot of capabilities there. So here I won't go into the details of these standard. So that's a snapshot and there is a link here. You can actually explore. These are the different TSA and related projects in nitripoe in these different areas of synchronization latency reliability or configuration and management. And there are many ongoing projects. You know, there are. projects that are done and I show some examples of the implementations of them, but you know, this is ongoing work, right? that's still a lot more to be done in this space and on top you see there are profiles that means some markets may need just a subset of this feature. So what we do is the industries we get to get and Define a profile meaning what the options or subset of tools is important for industrial or for Aerospace or for automotive. You'll see that there are different profiles that are also defined. And you know from a protocol stack standpoint. You can look at as I mentioned briefly earlier right here same tools as something at the data link layer that builds on top of the the trees go in Mac layers. and then you can still run TCP IP on top and other protocols on top as well, right, but the key is the foundation is based on standard Hardware like standard Wi-Fi chips or internet chips of cellular 5G, you know chips. Okay, so let me go through moving through the some examples here. But again as I mentioned earlier there are profiles in different Industries. You can check this out later on. but I'll try to move more now into the Wi-Fi and the 5G part right and you know. specially because while all these started with wired communication, even there you have a problem of congestion, right? So for this type of time critical application, so you can imagine in Wireless this problem is even harder to solve, you know, but Wireless bring many Advantage right because you don't have wires you need Mobility. You need you can get flexibility of moving things around in a factory. You can have more reconfigurability. So it's really a good tool to have and that's what's driving the interest for also enabling these time sensitive features over Wireless Solutions. and just to give you our next stint of the how big the problem is, right? If you look at the and this figure on the left. the current consumer Wireless solutions that you have your standard Wi-Fi, you know or cellular 5G right the standard consumer grade. Today, you know your latency if you measure latency error rate, they are around these ballpark right things of milliseconds the best case you get right but 100 millisecond mostly. And internet with this TSN features is pushing down to microsecond, right? ditch the goal is really to get wireless from this consumer grade to much closer to what you can get on the wire basically adding more determinism had better reliability. and I think we are now in this ballpark of a millisecond, you know, that's where I'll show some results on that but you know With still a little bit far from the actual wire, but that's this scope of the problem right of the potential here, right? We're trying to get to and wireless different because there are different effects on the wireless channel right stochastic in nature. There are variations in frequency in the interface and all the things you have to deal with which is not the case for wire, which is more stable right with some isolation. But you know, that is a hope here right? Because we have new capabilities and wireless is always evolving. A few things to highlight are they latest. Wi-Fi 660 and 5G standards, which have more capabilities and I'll just highlight one figure you'll see in this to to size. here is really both of them are based on on a concept called ifdma where you enable more granular scheduling of the time in the frequency resources in the Wireless Systems. So that gives a a more capability for you to allocate resources and to control the the access to the channel and improve the time it is so those are some of the key features in these systems and you can see Even though these are completely different Wireless Technologies. They do share some of these fundamental features like fdma for example in Wi-Fi 6, you know and 5G. Okay, so let's continue now moving a little more into examples of how you're using this TS and features into into Wireless, right? First I'll start with Wi-Fi. So basically, there are two TSN features that we actually have already. defined standards for and actually have implemented it in some of the Wi-Fi devices that we have. One is time synchronization. So this is basically the ability to to transmit time from a clock what we call Grandmaster is a reference time that you can transmit that time across the network. And make sure that all devices have tightly synchronized blocks across the whole network. and you can use that clock to in your application. Let's say to to align the control cycle of the you know, an industrial automation system, right? where the sensors need to send data the right time you can use that for it, but you can also use that clock to coordinate activities on the network side. And that's the second feature here what we call time our scheduling. and this is based on the I triple standard called a2.1 qbz. And the time synchronization is also based on the standard called a total.oneas. with some Wi-Fi support for it through ftn or timey measurement FTM is the latest, you know, fine time measurement is We use okay. So first you synchronize every device and then you will Define a schedule where within Wi-Fi you have set of keys in each device. And the basic concept is you define windows that are protected. Some of these skills are protected. meaning like during certain times only one of those windows are open and everything else is close in that way you actually Make sure that you have a protected window over the air. and then when that time critical traffic comes it will be able to to get through the channel without you know completion. So that's one of the capabilities, you know that we have over over Wi-Fi with this feature. There are more Tools in wifi 6 that you can improve this even further I want going to the details, but you know some things like a trigger-based access. It's useful for that. of now again, this is just some data illustrating how these trim our shaping Works in Wi-Fi. you know basically as I mentioned you actually have to use and you'll reserve a time for the Tran critical queue what we call the tsmq and then you can use the rest of the time for other traffic and you repeat this cycle. And that's one way that you get. This performance on the right side you'll see. Without this feature you have latency that shift, you know that they vary a lot all the way up to 60 millisecond. but when you have this enabled and you create a cycle where you give this time Windows, you can actually bound the oscillators for the time critical flow, right? And because the time critical always gonna have a window certain times. So that's just an example to illustrate how this works. Briefly I mentioned I won't go in details here because we don't have time but you can check some reference on this. Wi-Fi with trigger base or fdma access allows you to switch from the traditional contention base. mechanism Wi-Fi where everyone's competing. for the channel And they may have collisions to a mode where the access point. schedules the transmission so basically the access point controls the access of the channel say I tell who is going to transmit at what time and then I can also have multiple stations transmit at the same time. That's what the fdma mode gives you so that actually reduce latency. And crazy reliability with WiFi as well. These are some. simulation results. We did some time back to illustrate. if you compare traditional Wi-Fi with this trigger base, you know you can get bound to the latest with a lot more reliability in more capacity. Basically, you can support let's say one millisecond you could support nine users compared to four in the traditional system, you know, and so on so that I mean the main point on this is this gives you a lot more control of the the Channel with Wi-Fi. that improves the feminism. another feature with Wi-Fi that we have implemented that comes from the TSN toolbox is called a redundancy. It's very simple concept right is you if you have something that's really time critical safety critical like controlling a robot. For example. you can already done this to it because if one link fails you have another one and you replicate the data across different paths. And you can apply this feature on a wired link as well. Some things are so critical as saying in airplanes or in vehicles right that they already have multiple wires so we can do the same over Wireless and it's even more important in Wireless because you are susceptible to more interference right and things you can't control. So what? Law is you basically use two radius within the device two channels at the same time. So basically to redundant links on Networks. and that show you know, these figures shows that if you have you know that redundant capability you can improve your reliability right for a given latency bound. You know by almost half, you know 50% high, right? Oh double the reliable here, right? So from 46 to 99% is some experience experiments we did right? So that's very simple concept basically just redundant links and set it in both links and the probability of the interference to happen in both things at the same time is lower and you if you need more redundancy, you have to keep adding more links, but eventually there'll be a point where you'll be, you know, not cost-effective right because you're really need to be real systems. Let me see if this works. Okay, this is to illustrate an example where we use some of these capabilities to control our robot over a Wi-Fi 6 Channel. And do find manipulation and and this graph shows. The latencies we are observing in this the histogram for the latency in this experiment right around you know, wanted to Two and a half three millisecond at the most right? these robot was operating at 2 millisecond cycle so every two millisecond we had to to send a command. So that that was the traffic. We're trying to secure you. Okay. Yeah, this is another figure. I will skip this one because of the time but basically illustrates that when you have the latency variation, oh when you have in these experiment right you can have the latest around 2 milliseconds me into it. More or less 1% there. Okay, so let's continue. Now. Look at what is next right in in the Wi-Fi with the ascent and then I'll get a little bit into the 5G. So I showed you some results that we had with Wi-Fi 5 Wi-Fi 6 now, we actually in wifi 7 so Wi-Fi 7 is just getting ready this month. Actually. They should be done with the spec and they're already products based on Wi-Fi 7 in in the market. So so that is the latest Wi-Fi 7 base on the 800.11b spec. One I'll talk about two main features that comes in Wi-Fi 7 one is called multilink operation. You remember I showed you the redundancy results those results were using two different chip sets right two radios for the same. compute device in Wi-Fi 7 actually a single Wi-Fi chip can actually have two links in it already by having these multilink feature. So you can do that. same concept now in a cheaper way, let's put that way right so you can operate within a single Wi-Fi device. Of course. It depends how many bands your support. We have Wi-Fi 2.4586. So at most three, I think that's that's a feasible thing. So this can help you improve throughput but Can help with latency and reliability. in another feature that we have included in Wi-Fi 7 is this concept of protected window that I mentioned earlier for scheduling? where the in the wireless Channel itself you have you can create this Protective Service periods called TWD service period where you can restrict the time. For only certain traffic and in that way match what we had with this cubic solution. So these are some of the the capabilities in the Wi-Fi 7 okay, so let me shift now a little bit on the 5G side. I I trust everyone heard about 5G I won't go into the details of 5G, but there is one component of 5G. that's very useful to achieve these that I mean is we're trying to get you right and this is called urlc Auto reliable all agency where the 5G system can guarantee some of these capables within the system. And then what we did in as an industry right in Wi-Fi like in wifi in 5G as well with defined. and 3gpp worked on this to Define standards to coordinate or connect the 5G Network to a TSA Network and synchronized time across the 5G system. So this is something that you know has been standardized as part of 5G release 16. Is how you transport time across the 5G system. There is some concepts of gateways called. device side PSN translator Network site here Center later that defies the mechanist to do this. And in that way you can have accurate time sink across this systems. There are also tools that you can do something very similar to what we showed in Wi-Fi where we can provide qos for certain flows. That guarantee that you're going to be delivered within a deadline using some of the 5G POS formatting. That this relies on capabilities of the base stations to a schedule. and you know some of the implementations of these are being developed at this point. so In in general right again, I we don't have time to go into the details, but there's a lot of good reference to about that as well. So to sum up, right? One thing we try to do is not only develop this capability right within our products or our systems. But also we need the industry to adopt that right and for that to actually have to work with steam. There's organizations or industry alliances to do that. I mentioned already plays a role 3gp as well. Wi-Fi Alliance Is specific to the TSN area? We actually created a industrialized called Avenue Alliance. And its goal is really to provide testing for this TSN specific features. for internet Wi-Fi and 5G So in Avenue allies, we actually create test plans. we create. a test tools and we actually have plugfest where the vendors come and test their devices to make sure they interoperate. We actually launching a certification from program for TSA and for ethernet and working on the next one which will be a wireless TSN certification program. You can check the website. There are also a lot of white papers that are available about this Technologies there even there are opportunities for universities to get involved as well. So this is part of the industry, you know adoption that worked that we have to do. And with that I'd like to conclude briefly, you know. pointing to some directions that there still need for a lot more work, right? I talked a lot today about time and latency, but you know, we need time a little later she guarantees but there is more right for example you need security for this system and actually now you have new threads because you have time synchronization. You need to secure those those assets right time, right and you need to secure the network to avoid impact on latency for them. Resilience is very important like I mentioned there are some ways to address it through redundancy, But you know Mobility how you do this at fast speeds right with changing conditions and you have to be efficient. because you know you could have a dedicated Network for a single device, but that's not gonna cut in in the real business right case so How you be more efficient how you can dynamically manage this networks? And that's when everywhere automation learning AI is gonna play a big role, role, right? I think you know given our time I would stop here and and you open for questions in you know, I can share this lies later. You'll see a few other things I have about future Wireless Systems like Wi-Fi 8 and CG. But I think we we >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Great. >> Dave Cavalcanti: can stop here and open for questions at this point. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thanks. Thanks for taking care about our time. >> Dave Cavalcanti: Yes, I have to be precise right so >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Yes. >> Dave Cavalcanti: I've been talking about it, you know. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: 2PM the students have commitments. Otherwise we would be for sure spending a lot of time talking about this interesting topic as you know in we are trying in Academia accessing some. and simulators to understand and the TSA and 5G Wi-Fi domains and tackle some of the open questions open research opportunities and let me I have a couple of so there's one question here over the YouTube channel. That was supposed by Everton. He he says I think this is this. Is pointed very well to your protocol stack, so The wireless TSN is doing this so creating this determinist. What about the the TCP the stack? Is there something that is companion that is being developed. in closer to the application on the apis. He mentioned the l4s. Congestion control. Is there something to highlight there across layer from the transport layer to the that you you would like to highlight. >> Dave Cavalcanti: Yeah, that's that's a interesting. point to explore you know TCP as we know right highest concession control and changes the bandwidth change the data rate and Actually, we have a paper that was published last year. I can't point you to the reference that explore when you use TCP. for these real time application actually you end up with some Behavior. That's not deterministic actually because of the way of TCP working, right? So When I put TCP in this trust in this protocol stack what I see the industry is moving to is. for the real-time flows when you have TSN under underlying Network to guarantee that the time it isn't you those real-time flows over UDP. Actually TCP is not a good choice for that. Of course, you may be able to enhance it and make it determinist, but that kind of defeats the purpose of TCP, right which is to control congestion and it can still be used on top of the same network, but you know, maybe more for the best effort traffic, right? but most of the solutions that are using time critical flows, it's more effective to do that with I know there are some solutions in l4s. I'm aware. There are some discussions even in Wi-Fi in i-340 as well and other Wi-Fi groups to how to adopt that and in a less point, I would say >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: right >> Dave Cavalcanti: Is a very important point of cross cross layer optimization here, right? again, TSN stays in the lower layer, but if you have delays in the stack in the device right higher layer, it's gonna affect your intu and performance. So start the delay across the stack and share information between layers is going to be important and it's something that you know, it's a little bit open area because not a lot has been done traditionally. We try to separate all these layers, >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: yes, >> Dave Cavalcanti: right minimizing information across them. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: but but then the cross layer of demisations when they hit and they bring against them they >> Dave Cavalcanti: I'll just give you one example, you can check that out. There is a protocol highly protocol called DDS. that's using raw stew. over as a middleware over UDP and actually they we had some papers on these and there is a spec that's open. So openly available discussing. how you do cross-lay optimization from DDs to TSN? >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: baby >> Dave Cavalcanti: I think that's a good reference to >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: That's interesting. >> Dave Cavalcanti: to to check it. Yeah. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: So maybe maybe we can see something like a quick deed over UDP for TSN at >> Dave Cavalcanti: something >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: TSN over you be a congestion control transport related. Yeah, it makes sense. So >> Dave Cavalcanti: Good. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: thanks. Yeah, please share. The pointers will forward to the students and we can post them also us as notes in the in the seminar web page. here is another question. I'm now going through the students questions before they watch the talk, Okay, and one was interesting about home users. So and you mentioned about applications of DSN in our homes that that you are aware of >> Dave Cavalcanti: Yes, so one interesting application I mentioned in a home is actually the main driver for that also Enterprises is external reality, right? so having you know as I mentioned, it's kind of a control loop as well, right because you track in a in Excel reality application you track the head movement you compute the rendering of the next scene. you're gonna show right or the next asset you're gonna show and then you have to transmit that back to the user and this has to happen in very, you know, you know with type deadlines if you have a lot of Jitter in that you will have a bad performance. So that is one of applications and We actually have it prototype that I will try to you know, actually miss if I can show this very quickly here where we applied TSN. to You can see here. We build a digital twin of a network using external reality and this is AR. And these application actually we are transmitting this between the compute and the network using Wireless TSN, you know capability and we can show How bad the performance is when you have when you don't have the TSN feature because you have You know congestion right and and register compared to a performance when you have a TSN, so That we are actively working in these areas as well. So I just want to point that you >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: That's >> Dave Cavalcanti: know. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: that's very interesting where we are playing out also with the meta Quest right now. in our lab at Intrigue and and we are building a Not that digital dream, but something to be visualized Wi-Fi performance over space. maybe we can >> Dave Cavalcanti: and that's great and you know you feel if you search also find Intel and The Meta has a collaboration where they actually have some optimized Wi-Fi >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: put >> Dave Cavalcanti: capabilities for these type of applications. That's also interesting you can see >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: that's that's very good to know. okay here I spotted another question that again it's time late these days. It's about ai ai machine learning. And you pointed also your in your last slide about AI as a future. and Tool, let's say to >> Dave Cavalcanti: Right. Yeah. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: improve some of the can you share some of the that can be publicly shared? uses. So applications of AI or machine learning >> Dave Cavalcanti: Mm-hmm. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: to the challenges of TSN. I don't know maybe Scheduling I can imagine that you can learn and propose better schedulers after You observe what what would you say? What is the intersection of AI and ml for TSN and wireless TSN that you are aware of or that you can imagine that there are opportunities. >> Dave Cavalcanti: Yes. I think the one you mention is is very clear one area that we have to explore more. Is because this is scheduling in a TSN capable network is very complex actually computationally complex as well. And especially when they let Network increases and you have you know to compute updates in the schedule, so How can can machine learning do better than some of the Existing Solutions based on network. how close for example other traditional things aristics that are there? there? So that's a fairly one area. But also AI is playing a role everywhere now, right and it will impact the TSN in other ways. For example. this control look right case I know people are exploring robotics. where the model-based controls are being changed or it's exporting. how reinforcement learning can be used in the control loop as well to replace some of the control. Loops, right? So that's another area where AI is being used and that means you need if you do that, right the AI workload will need to meet strict Time Performance. Right? So you need to consider that as well. So that's another connection to the TSN. Right because in the end to end you need to meet the latency deadline. in the third one is how AI is using time right if you're doing sense of fusional things like that for databases time synchronization may play a role, right? But yeah, so those are I mean everyone is looking at AI tools right now and see how it improves but you know, I think these are few examples different they configuration. is one of the top >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: and right >> Dave Cavalcanti: top areas, you know automating that with AI. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: right and you mentioned also here security and safety and we know security always goes into the other direction of time right because crypto functions take time. What is out there? What are what are opportunities over in the security space or what are challenges you mentioned a couple like securing the time, but can you elaborate maybe or give some examples? so if you know about >> Dave Cavalcanti: Yes, I can give some examples and these are things we are working on right now. I mean, I don't have things I can share here. But you know, we actually yeah, maybe that's some results on to share but you know one of the very straightforward things that come like When you're building a network that every device and it the actions of network is really based on accurate time. You know that time becomes an important asset right? So if someone's You know gets into one of these systems that propagates the time across the network start to add small. Changes to the time right that guess propagate and what that means. is that could result in a schedule being changed and then you know these Gates that I mention right will be operating at the wrong time. So is more impacting time can actually have a big but impacting the performance and these are things that have not really been explored when people think about security they think about the You know. That the usual issues like oh Jamie, right? Okay, you can jam my Wi-Fi network. Sure. But there are attacks that are most subtle and now You know you an expert could get into some of these systems is start changing time. how we protect those. systems against those attacks, you know, I think that's one at least one of the areas that we started to explore. that may be many other threads right, but I think at least this is One Direction that we are looking to to protect, you know. In this area, you know. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Yeah. okay, I don't usually take this type of questions, but I think I would have take it for this time. It's a little bit more versus personal one. Yeah, so he asks he/she. I don't know. It's anonymous. peer review system that we are using so that the question is, how did you move from Brazil and get Harry Potter Intel to work on on this hot topics That would be very interested in working top leading tech companies such as Intel were made. You don't need to go into the details. But what would you recommend to this grad students for for a successful career internationally big companies What would be your your recommendation? >> Dave Cavalcanti: Yeah, I I >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: I'm sorry to move out of the taking >> Dave Cavalcanti: Yeah. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: but I >> Dave Cavalcanti: Sure, and I'll happy to share my my approach to this. Right so and and I would say first you guys already. have a good head start because you are in a great University. Okay, that's a good start build the basis. Right? And I know in the company is great And that's it. one job and the way I get into this right is really coming. And I know people that came to Intel from Brazil, but it's very limited. They came to Acquisitions and you know to be honest like in Intel Advocate. We don't hire directly from Brazil's very rare. unless maybe we have a collaboration with the university and and we find a special case, right but I came to do my PhD in the US, you know, or you can do a postdoc right? But once you get into the us or Europe I think we have a lot more connections with big companies on the research side. You know, like I'm I'm within Intel labs. And we do a lot of collaboration with universities actually trying to start something with Christian as well. And participating those who open up opportunities for you to do internships. For example, that's how I got into the industry first when I first moved to us, I didn't know I'm gonna stay there, but then I did my PhD and then in the middle Phillips research actually all from the internship, so I go there for internship. They offer me a job and then I get you know and you just get into the system, so you know get to the US or to to Europe. I think that will give increase your chances right and or get collaborations from Brazil with these >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: and right >> Dave Cavalcanti: companies. I think that's another option as well, you know. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: great. I think that's a great message. That's what we as you mentioned that we are doing also in the smartness engineering resource center with with Ericson and fabes support and we encourage a lot the mobility of PhD students and we have great opportunities of a past exchanges for for research and just to set a few more examples. Not from it's a it's in the industry. It's not Intel but it's Qualcomm that >> Dave Cavalcanti: Yeah. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: you also know well and you know, the CEO is Christiano Amon and alumni of our faculty. >> Dave Cavalcanti: That's great. Yes. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: and another example of talent that went internationally out and is successful and that's an excellent. reach to the next week topic the next week seminar will be by another alumni from our faculty. It's Gabriela surita, and she's a senior research engineer at Google and working on this Deep Mind AI tools over for engineering and reinforcement learning methods and so that's how we can close right at 2PM Brazil time. And thank you Dave. That was very nice. Well what you had to share on again, I appreciate your time and your message to encourage students to work hard and be successful. >> Dave Cavalcanti: Yeah, thank you Christian. Thanks everyone and and wish you all the best. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Thank you that. >> Dave Cavalcanti: Okay, let's okay. Thank you. >> Christian Esteve Rothenberg: Take Care Bye. 